The following is a conversation with Eugenia Kuida, cofounder of Replica, which is an app
that allows you to make friends with an artificial intelligence system, a chatbot, that learns
to connect with you on an emotional, you could even say, a human level by being a friend.
For those of you who know my interest in AI and views on life in general, know that Replica and
Eugenia's line of work is near and dear to my heart. The origin story of Replica is grounded
in a personal tragedy of Eugenia losing her close friend, Roman Mazurenki, who was killed
crossing the street by a hit and run driver in late 2015. He was 34. The app started as a way
to grieve the loss of a friend by trading a chatbot and your old net on text messages between
Eugenia and Roman. The rest is a beautiful human story as we talk about with Eugenia.
When a friend mentioned Eugenia's work to me, I knew I had to meet her and talk to her. I felt
before, during, and after that this meeting would be an important one in my life. And it was. I think
in ways that only time will truly show, to me and others. She is a kind and brilliant person.
It was an honor and a pleasure to talk to her. Quick summary of the sponsors, DoorDash, Dollar
Shave Club, and Cash App. Click the sponsor links in the description to get a discount and to support
this podcast. As a side note, let me say that deep meaningful connection between human beings
and artificial intelligence systems is a lifelong passion for me. I'm not yet sure where that passion
will take me, but I decided some time ago that I will follow it boldly and without fear, just as
far as I can take it. With a bit of hard work and a bit of luck, I hope I'll succeed in helping
build AI systems that have some positive impact on the world and on the lives of a few people out
there. But also, it is entirely possible that I am in fact one of the chatbots that Eugenia
and the replica team have built. And this podcast is simply a training process for the neural net
that's trying to learn to connect to human beings. One episode at a time. In any case,
I wouldn't know if I was or wasn't. And if I did, I wouldn't tell you. If you enjoy this thing,
subscribe on YouTube, review it with 5 stars on Apple Podcast, follow on Spotify, support on Patreon,
or connect with me on Twitter, Alex Friedman. As usual, I'll do a few minutes of ads now and no
ads in the middle. I'll try to make these interesting, but give you time stamps so you can skip. But
please do still check out the sponsors by clicking the links in the description to get a discount
by whatever they're selling. It really is the best way to support this podcast.
This show is sponsored by Dollar Shave Club. Try them out with a one time offer for only
five bucks and free shipping at dollarshave.com slash lex. The starter kit comes with a six
blade razor refills and all kinds of other stuff that makes shaving feel great. I've been a member
of Dollar Shave Club for over five years and actually signed up when I first heard about them
on the Joe Rogan Experience podcast. And now, friends, we have come full circle. It feels like
I made it now that I can do a read for them just like Joe did all those years ago. Back when he
also did ads for some less reputable companies. Let's say that you know about if you're a true fan
of the old school podcasting world. Anyway, I just use the razor and the refills, but they told
me I should really try out the shave butter. I did. I love it. It's translucent somehow,
which is a cool new experience. Again, try the ultimate shave starter set today for just five
bucks plus free shipping at dollarshaveclub.com slash lex. This show is also sponsored by DoorDash.
You get $5 off and zero delivery fees on your first order of 15 bucks or more. When you download
the DoorDash app and enter code, you guessed it, Lex. I have so many memories of working late
nights for a deadline with a team of engineers, whether that's for my PhD at Google or MIT,
and eventually taking a break to argue about which DoorDash restaurant to order from. And when the
food came, those moments of bonding, of exchanging ideas, of pausing, to shift attention from the
programs, the humans, or special. For a bit of time, I'm on my own now, so I miss that camaraderie,
but actually I still use DoorDash a lot. There's a million options that fit into my crazy keto
diet ways. Also, it's a great way to support restaurants in these challenging times. Once
again, download the DoorDash app and enter code, Lex, to get $5 off and zero delivery fees on your
first order of $15 or more. Finally, this show is presented by Cash App, the number one finance
app in the App Store. I can truly say that they're an amazing company, one of the first sponsors,
if not the first sponsor to truly believe in me. And I think quite possibly the reason I'm still
doing this podcast, so I'm forever grateful to Cash App. So thank you. And as I said many times
before, use code LexPodcast when you download the app from Google Play or the App Store. Cash App
lets you send money to friends by Bitcoin and invest in the stock market with as little as $1.
I usually say other stuff here in the read, but I wasted all that time up front saying how
grateful I am to Cash App. I'm going to try to go off the top of my head a little bit more for these
reads, because I'm actually very lucky to be able to choose the sponsors that we take on.
And that means I can really only take on the sponsors that I truly love,
and then I can just talk about why I love them. So it's pretty simple. Again, get Cash App from
the App Store, Google Play, use code LexPodcast, get $10, and Cash App will also donate $10 to
first, an organization that is helping to advance robotics and STEM education
for young people around the world. And now here's my conversation with Eugenia Kuida.
Okay, before we talk about AI and the amazing work you're doing, let me ask you ridiculously,
we're both Russian, so let me ask you a ridiculously romanticized Russian question.
Do you think human beings are alone, fundamentally, on a philosophical level? In our
existence, when we go through life, do you think just the nature of our life is loneliness?
Yeah, so we have to read Dostoevsky at school, as you probably know.
In Russian? Yeah. I mean, it's part of your school program. So I guess if you read that,
then you sort of have to believe that. You're made to believe that you're fundamentally alone,
and that's how you live your life. How do you think about it? You have a lot of friends,
but at the end of the day, do you have like a longing for connection with other people that's
maybe another way of asking it? Do you think that's ever fully satisfied?
I think we are fundamentally alone. We're born alone. We're die alone, but I view my whole life
as trying to get away from that, trying to not feel lonely. And again, we're talking about a
subjective way of feeling alone. It doesn't necessarily mean that you don't have any connections,
or you are actually isolated. You think it's a subjective thing, but again,
another absurd measurement wise thing. How much loneliness do you think there is in the world?
So like, if you see loneliness as a condition, how much of it is there? Do you think? I guess
how many, there's all kinds of studies and measures of how many people in the world feel
alone. There's all these measures of how many people are, self report, or just all these kinds
of different measures. But in your own perspective, how big of a problem do you think it is, sizewise?
Well, I'm actually fascinated by the topic of loneliness. I try to read about it as much as I
can. I think there's a paradox, because loneliness is not a clinical disorder. It's not
something that you can get your insurance to pay for if you're struggling with that.
Yet, it's actually proven in pretty tons of papers, tons of research around that. It is proven
that it's correlated with earlier life expectancy, shorter lifespan. In a way, right now, what
scientists would say that it's a little bit worse than VNOB, so not actually doing any
physical activity in your life. In terms of the impact on your health.
In terms of impact on your physiological health, yeah. So it basically puts you,
if you're constantly feeling lonely, your body responds like it's basically all the time under
stress. So it's always in this alert state. So it's really bad for you because it actually
drops your immune system and gets your response to inflammation. It's quite different. So all the
cardiovascular diseases actually responds to viruses, so it's much easier to catch a virus.
That's sad now that we're living in a pandemic and it's probably making us a lot more alone.
And it's probably weakening the immune system, making us more susceptible to the virus.
It's kind of sad.
Yeah, the statistics are pretty horrible around that. So around 30% of all millennials report
that they're feeling lonely constantly. 30%.
30%. And then it's much worse for Gen Z. And then 20% of millennials say that they feel lonely.
And they also don't have any close friends. And then I think 25% or so and then 20% would say
they don't even have acquaintances. That's in the United States?
That's in the United States. And I'm pretty sure that it's much worse everywhere else.
Like in the UK, I mean, it was widely tweeted and posted when they were talking about a minister
of loneliness that they wanted to point because four out of 10 people in the UK feel lonely.
I think that thing actually exists. So yeah, you will die sooner if you are lonely.
And again, this is only when we're only talking about your perception of loneliness or feeling
lonely. That is not objectively being fully socially isolated. However, the combination
of being fully socially isolated and not having many connections and also feeling lonely,
that's pretty much a deadly combination. So it strikes me bizarre or strange that
this is a wide known fact. And then there's really no one working really on that because it's
subclinical. It's not clinical. It's not something that you can will tell your doctor and get a
treatment or something. Yet it's killing us. Yeah. So there's a bunch of people trying to
evaluate, like try to measure the problem by looking at like how social media is affecting
loneliness and all that kind of stuff. So it's like measurement. Like if you look at the field of
psychology, they're trying to measure the problem and not that many people actually, but some,
but you're basically saying how many people are trying to solve the problem.
Like how would you try to solve the problem of loneliness? Like if you just stick to humans,
I mean, or basically not just the humans, but the technology that connects us humans,
do you think there's a hope for that technology to do the connection? Like are you on social media
much? Unfortunately. Do you find yourself like, again, if you're sort of introspect about
how connected you feel to other human beings, how not alone you feel, do you think social
media makes it better or worse? Maybe for you personally or in general?
I think it's easier to look at some stats. And I mean, gen Zs seem to be,
generosity seems to be much lonelier than millennials in terms of however they report
loneliness. They're definitely the most connected generation in the world. I mean,
I still remember life without an iPhone, without Facebook. They don't know that that ever existed
or at least don't know how it was. So that tells me a little bit about the fact that
might be this hyper connected world might actually make people feel lonelier. I don't
know exactly what the measurements are around that, but I would say in my personal experience,
I think it does make you feel a lot lonelier. Mostly, yeah, we're all super connected. But
I think loneliness, the feeling of loneliness doesn't come from not having any social connections
whatsoever. Again, tons of people that are in long term relationships experience bouts of
loneliness and continued loneliness. And it's more the question about the true connection about
actually being deeply seen, deeply understood. And in a way, it's also about your relationship
with yourself. In order to not feel lonely, you actually need to have a better relationship and
feel more connected to yourself than this feeling actually starts to go away a little bit. And then
you open up yourself to actually meeting other people in a very special way, not just at a friend
on Facebook kind of way. So just to briefly touch on it, I mean, do you think it's possible to form
that kind of connection with AI systems more down the line of some of your work? Do you think that's
engineering wise, a possibility to alleviate loneliness is not with another human, but with
an AI system? Well, I know that's that's a fact. That's what we're doing. And we see it and we
measure that and we see how people start to feel less lonely, talking to their virtual AI friend.
So basically a chatbot at the basic level, but could be more, like, do you have, I'm not even
speaking sort of about specifics, but do you have a hope, like, if you look 50 years from now,
do you have a hope that there's just like, AI's that are, like, optimized for, let me let me first
start, like, right now, the way people perceive AI, which is recommender systems for Facebook and
Twitter, social media, they see AI is basically destroying, first of all, the fabric of our
civilization, but second of all, making us more lonely. Do you see like a world where it's possible
to just have AI systems floating about that, like, make our life less lonely? Yeah, make us happy,
like, are putting good things into the world in terms of our individual lives.
Yeah, totally believe it. And that that's why we're also working on that.
I think we need to also make sure that what we're trying to optimize for we're actually measuring.
And it is a north star metric that we're going after. And all of our product and all of our
business models are optimized for that. Because you can talk, you know, a lot of products that talk
about, you know, making you feel less lonely, making you feel more connected, they're not really
measuring that. So they don't really know whether their users are actually feeling less lonely in
the long run, or feeling more connected in the long run. So I think it's really important to put
your measure it. Yeah, to measure it. What's a what's a good measurement of loneliness?
Well, so that's something that I'm really interested in. How do you measure that people
are feeling better, or that they're feeling less lonely? With loneliness, there's a scale,
there's a UCLA 20 and UCLA three recently scale, which is basically a questionnaire that you fill
out. And you can see whether in the long run, it's improving or not. And that does it capture the
momentary feeling of loneliness? Does it look in like the past month? Like, is it basically
self report? Does it try to sneak up on you? Try tricky to answer honestly, or something like that?
Well, what's yeah, I'm not familiar with the question. It is just asking you a few questions
like how often did you feel like lonely? Or how often do you feel connected to other people in
this last few couple weeks? It's similar to the self report questionnaires for depression, anxiety,
like pH Q9 and get seven. Of course, as any self report questionnaires, that's not necessarily very
precise or very well measured. But still, if you take a big enough population, you get them through
these questionnaires, you can see you can see positive dynamic. And so you basically, you put
people through questionnaires to see like, is this thing is our is what we're creating making
people happier? Yeah, we measure. So we measure two outcomes, one short term, right after the
conversation, we ask people whether this conversation made them feel better, worse or same.
This metric right now is at 80%. So 80% of all our conversations make people feel better.
But I should have done the questionnaire with you. You feel a lot worse after we've done this
conversation. That's actually fascinating. I should probably do that. But that's probably
do that. You should totally and aim for 80% aim to outperform your current state of the art AI system
in these human conversations. So we'll get to your work with replica. But let me continue on the
line of absurd questions. So you talked about, you know, deep connection of the humans, deep connection
with AI, meaningful connection. Let me ask about love, people make fun of me because I talk about
love all the time. But what, what do you think love is? Like maybe in the context of a meaningful
connection with somebody else, do you draw a distinction between love, like friendship,
and Facebook friends? Or is it a graduate? No, it's all the same. No, like, is it just a
gradual thing? Or is there something fundamental about us humans that seek like a really deep
connection with another human being? And what is that? What is love, Eugenia?
I'm going to just enjoy asking you these questions, seeing you struggle.
Thanks. Well, the way I see it, specifically, the way it relates to our work and the way it was
the way it inspired our work on replica. I think one of the biggest and the most precious gifts
we can give to each other now in 2020 as humans is this gift of deep empathetic understanding,
the feeling of being deeply seen. Like what does that mean? Like that you exist? Like somebody
acknowledging that? Somebody seeing you for who you actually are. And that's extremely,
extremely rare. I think that is that combined with unconditional positive regard,
belief and trust that you internally are always inclined for positive growth and believing you
in this way, letting you be a separate person at the same time. And this deep empathetic
understanding, for me, that's the combination that really creates something special, something
that people, when they feel it once, they will always long for it again and something that starts
huge fundamental changes in people. When we see that someone accepts us so deeply,
we start to accept ourselves and the paradox is that's when big changes start happening,
big fundamental changes in people start happening. So I think that is the ultimate therapeutic
relationship that is, and that might be in some way a definition of love. So acknowledging that
there's a separate person and accepting you for who you are. Now, on a slightly, and you mentioned
therapeutic, that sounds very like a very healthy view of love, but is there also like a, like,
you know, if we look at heartbreak and, you know, most love songs are probably about heartbreak,
right? Is that like the mystery, the tension, the danger, the fear of loss, you know, all of that,
what people might see in the negative light as like games or whatever, but just the dance of
human interaction, yeah, fear of loss and fear of like, you said, like, once you feel it once,
you long for it again, but you also, once you feel it once, you might, for many people,
they've lost it. So they fear losing it, they feel loss. So is that part of it? Like, you're
speaking like beautifully about like the positive things, but is it important to be able to be
afraid of losing it from an engineering perspective?
I mean, it's a huge part of it. And unfortunately, we all, you know, face it at some points in our
lives. I mean, I did. You want to go into details? How'd you get your heart broken?
Sure. Well, so mine is pretty straight, my source pretty straightforward there.
I did have a friend that was, you know, that at some point in my 20s, became really, really close
to me. And we became really close friends. I grew up pretty lonely. So in many ways when I'm building,
you know, these, these AI friends, I think about myself when I was 17, writing horrible poetry and,
you know, in my dial up modem at home. And, you know, and that was the feeling that I grew up with.
I was alone for a long time. I was a teenager. Where did you grow up?
In Moscow, in the outskirts of Moscow. So I just skateboarded during the day and come back home
and, you know, connect to the internet. And write poetry? And then write horrible poetry.
Was it love poems? All sorts of poems, obviously love poems. I mean, what other poetry can you
write when you're 17? Could be political or something. But yeah. But that was, you know,
that was kind of my, yeah, like deeply influenced by Joseph Brodsky and like all sorts of poets that
every 17 year old will will be looking, you know, looking at and reading. But yeah, that was my,
these were my teenage years. And I just never had a person that I thought would, you know,
take me as it is would accept me the way I am. And I just thought, you know, working and just
doing my thing and being angry at the world and being a reporter, I was an investigative reporter
working undercover and writing about people was my way to connect with, you know, with,
with others. I was deeply curious about every, everyone else. And I thought that, you know,
if I, if I go out there, if I write their stories, that means I'm more connected.
This is what this podcast is about, by the way. I'm desperate. I'm seeking connection.
I'm just kidding. Or am I, I don't know. So what, wait, reporter,
what, how did that make you feel more connected? I mean, you're still fundamentally pretty alone.
But you're always with other people, you know, you're always thinking about what other
place going to infiltrate, what other community can I write about, what other phenomenon can I
explore? And you sort of like a trickster, you know, and like, and a mythological character,
like creature that's just jumping between all sorts of different worlds and feel,
and feel sort of okay with, in all of them. So that was my dream job, by the way. That was like,
totally what I would have been doing if Russia was a different place.
And a little bit undercover. So like you weren't, you were trying to, like you said, mythological
creature trying to infiltrate. So try to be a part of the world. What are we talking about?
What kind of things did you enjoy writing about? I'd go work at a strip club or go.
Awesome. Okay. Well, I'd go work at a restaurant or just go write about, you know,
certain phenomenons or phenomenons or people in the city. And what, sorry to keep interrupting.
I'm the worst conversationalist. What stage of Russia is this? What, is this pre Putin,
post Putin? What, what was Russia like? Pre Putin is really long ago. This is Putin era.
That's the beginning of 2000s, 2010, 2007, eight, nine, 10. What were strip clubs like in Russia
and restaurants and culture and people's minds like in that early Russia that you were covering?
In those early 2000s, this was, there was still a lot of hope. There were still tons of hope that
you know, we're sort of becoming this western, westernized society. The restaurants were opening,
we were really looking at, you know, we're trying, we're trying to copy a lot of things from,
from the US, from Europe, bringing all these things in. Very enthusiastic about that.
So there was a lot of, you know, stuff going on. There was a lot of hope and dream for this,
you know, new Moscow that would be similar to, I guess, New York. I mean, to give you an idea in
year 2000 was the year when we had two movie theaters in Moscow. And there was this one first
coffee house that opened and it was like really big deal. By 2010, there were all sorts of things
everywhere. Almost like a chain, like a Starbucks type of coffee house or like you mean? Oh yeah,
like a Starbucks. I mean, I remember we were reporting on like, we were writing about the
opening of Starbucks. I think in 2007, that was one of the biggest things that happened in,
you know, in Moscow back in the time. Like that was worthy of a magazine cover and
that was definitely the, you know, the biggest talk of the town. Yeah, when was McDonald's?
Because I was still in Russia when McDonald's opened. That was in the 90s. I mean, yeah.
Oh yeah, I remember that very well. Yeah. Those were long, long lines. I think it was 1993 or
four, I don't remember. Did you actually go to McDonald's at that time? Did you do that?
I mean, that was a luxurious outing. That was definitely not something you do every day.
And also the line was at least three hours. So if you're going to McDonald's, that is not fast
food. That is like at least three hours in line. Yeah. And then no one is trying to eat fast after
that. Everyone is like trying to enjoy as much as possible. What's your memory of that? Oh,
it was insane. Positive? Extremely positive. It's a small strawberry milkshake and a hamburger and
small fries and my mom's there and sometimes I'll just, because I was really little, they'll just
let me run, you know, up the cashier and like cut the line, which is like, you cannot really do that
in Russia. So like for a lot of people, like a lot of those experiences might seem not very
fulfilling, you know, like it's on the verge of poverty, I suppose. But do you remember all that
time fondly? Like, because I do, like the first time I drank, you know, Coke, you know, all that
stuff, right? And just, yeah, the connection with other human beings in Russia, I remember,
I remember really positively. Like, how do you remember what the 90s and then the Russia you
were covering, just the human connections you had with people and the experiences?
Well, my, my parents were both, both physicists, my grandparents were both, well, my grandfather
was a nuclear physicist, a professor at the university, my dad worked at Chernobyl when
I was born in Chernobyl, analyzing kind of the everything after the explosion. And then I remember
and they were so they were making sort of enough money in the Soviet Union, so they were not,
you know, extremely poor or anything. It was pretty prestigious to be a professor,
uh, the dean and the university. And then I remember my grandfather started making $100 a month
after, you know, in the 90s. So then I remember we started our main line of work would be to go to
our little tiny country house, get a lot of apples there from apple trees, bring them back to,
to, to the city and sell them in the street. So me and my nuclear physicist grandfather were
just standing there and he'd selling those apples the whole day because that would make
you more money than, you know, working at the university. And then he'll just tell me to try to
teach me, um, you know, something about planets and whatever the particles and stuff. And, you know,
I'm not smart at all. So I could never understand anything. But I was interested as a journalist,
kind of type interested. But that was my memory. And you know, I'm happy that I wasn't, um, I
I somehow got spared that I was probably too young to remember any of the traumatic stuff. So
the only thing I really remember had this bootleg that was very traumatic. Had this bootleg
Nintendo, which was called was called dandy in Russia. So 1993, there was nothing to eat. Like
even if you had any money, you would go to the store and there was no food. I don't know if you
remember that. And our friend had a restaurant like a government, half government owned something
restaurant. So they always had supplies. So he exchanged a big bag of weed for this Nintendo,
the bootleg Nintendo. And then I remember very fondly because I think it was nine or
something like that. And we're seven traumatic. We just got it. And I was playing it. And there
was this, you know, dandy TV show. Yeah. So it's a positive sense. You mean like, like a definitive
well, they took it away and gave me a bag of weed instead. And I cried like my eyes out for
days and days and days. Oh, no. And then, you know, as a, and my dad said, we're going to like
exchange it back in a little bit. So you keep the little gun, you know, the one that you shoot
the ducks with. So I'm like, okay, I'm keeping the gun. So sometimes it's going to come back.
But then they exchanged the gun as well for some sugar or something. I was so pissed. I was like,
I didn't want to eat for days after that. I'm like, I don't want your food. Give me my Nintendo back.
That was extremely traumatic. But, you know, I was happy that that was my only traumatic
experience. You know, my dad had to actually go to Chernobyl with a bunch of 20 year olds. He was
20 when he went to Chernobyl. And that was right after the explosion. No one knew anything. The
whole crew he went with all of them are dead now. I think there was this one guy still
alive that was still alive for the last few years. I think he died a few years ago now.
My dad somehow luckily got back earlier than everyone else. But just the fact that that was the,
and I was always like, well, how did they send you? I was only, I was just born, you know,
you had a newborn talk about paternity leave. And like, but that's who they took because they
didn't know whether you would be able to have kids when you come back. So they took the ones with
kids. So him with some guys went to, and I'm just thinking of me, when I was 20, I was so
sheltered from any problems whatsoever in life. And then my dad, his 21st birthday at the reactor,
you like work three hours a day, you sleep the rest. And, and I, yeah, so I played with a lot
of toys from Chernobyl. What are your memories of Chernobyl in general, like the bigger context,
you know, because of that HBO show is the world's attention turned to it once again.
Like, what are your thoughts about Chernobyl? Did Russia screw that one up? Like,
you know, there's probably a lot of lessons about our modern times with
data about coronavirus and all that kind of stuff. It seems like there's a lot of misinformation.
There's a lot of people kind of trying to hide whether they screwed something up or not,
as it's very understandable, it's very human, very wrong, probably. But obviously,
Russia was probably trying to hide that they screwed things up. Like, what are your thoughts
about that time, personal and general? I mean, I was born when the explosion happened. So,
actually a few months after, so of course, I don't remember anything, apart from the fact that my
dad would bring me tiny toys, plastic things that would just go crazy, haywire when you, you know,
put the gig or thing to it. My mom was like, just nuclear about that. She was like, what are you
bringing? You should not do that. She was nuclear, very nice. Absolutely. Well, but yeah, but the
TV show was just phenomenal. It's definitely, first of all, it's incredible how that was made
not by the Russians, but someone else, but capturing so well everything about our country.
It felt a lot more genuine that most of the movies and TV shows that are made now in Russia are
just so much more genuine. And most of my friends in Russia were just incomplete all about the
show, but I think the, how good of a job they did, phenomenal, but also the apartments. There's
something. Yeah, the set design. I mean, Russians can't do that. We, you know, but you see everything
and it's like, well, that's exactly how it was. So I don't know that show. I don't know what to
think about that because it's British accents, British actors of a person. I forgot who created
the show. I'm not, but I remember reading about him and he's not, he doesn't even feel like,
like there's no Russia in this history. No, he did like super bad or something like that. Or like,
I don't know, whatever that thing about the bachelor party in Vegas,
number four and five or something were the ones that he worked with. Yeah. But so he,
it made me feel really sad for some reason that if a person, obviously a genius could go in and
just study and just be extreme attention to detail, they can do a good job. It made me think like,
why don't other people do a good job of this? Like about Russia, like there's so little about
Russia. There's so few good films about the Russian side of World War II of, I mean, there's so much
interesting, evil and not and beautiful moments in the history of the 20th century in Russia
that feels like there's not many good films on from the Russian. You would expect something from
the Russians. Well, they keep making these propaganda movies now. Oh, no. Unfortunately.
But yeah, Chernobyl was such a perfect TV show. I think capturing really well,
it's not about like even the set design, which was phenomenal, but just capturing all the problems
that exist now with the country and like focusing on the right things. Like if you build the whole
country on a lie, that's what's going to happen. And that's just this very simple kind of thing.
Yeah. And did you have your dad talked about it to you? Like his thoughts on the experience?
He never talks. He's this kind of Russian man that just, my husband who's American,
and he asked him a few times like, Igor, how did you, but why did you say yes? Or like,
why did you decide to go? You could have said, no, not go to Chernobyl. Why would like a person
that's what you do? You cannot say no. Yeah. It's just like a Russian way.
It's the Russian way. Men don't talk that much. They're downsides and upsides for that.
Yeah. That's the truth. Okay. So back to post Putin Russia.
Or maybe we skipped a few steps along the way, but you were trying to do, to be a journalist
in that time. What was Russia like at that time? Post said 2007 Starbucks type of thing.
What else? What else was Russia like then? I think there was just hope. There was this
big hope that we're going to be friends with the United States and we're going to be friends with
Europe and we're just going to be also country like those with bike lanes and parks and
everything's going to be urbanized. Again, we're talking about 90s where people would be shot in
the street and I sort of have a fond memory of going into a movie theater and coming out of it
after the movie and the guy that I saw on the stairs was like either shot. Again, it was like
a thing in the 90s that would be happening. People were getting shot here and there.
Tons of violence. Tons of just basically mafia mobs in the streets. And then the 2000s were
like things just got cleaned up. Oil went up and the country started getting a little bit richer.
The 90s were so grim mostly because the economy was in shambles and oil prices were not high,
so the country didn't have anything. We defaulted in 1998 and the money kept jumping back and
forth. First, there were millions of rubbles, then it got to like thousands, then it was
one rubble with something, then again to millions. It was like crazy town.
And then the 2000s were just these years of stability in a way and the country getting
a little bit richer because of, again, oil and gas. And we started to look at specifically in
Moscow and St. Petersburg to look at other cities in Europe and New York and U.S. and
trying to do the same in our small kind of city towns there.
What were your thoughts of Putin at the time?
Well, in the beginning, he was really positive. Everyone was very positive about Putin. He was
young. He was very energetic. He also immediately, somewhat compared to, well, that was not way
before the shortlist era. The shortlist era. Okay, so he didn't start off shortly. When did
the shortlist era? It's like the propaganda of riding a horse, fishing.
2010, 11, 12.
Yeah. That's my favorite. People talk about the favorite beetles. That's my favorite
Putin is the shortlist Putin.
No, I remember very, very clearly 1996 where Americans really helped Russia with elections
and Yeltsin got reelected, thankfully so, because there's a huge threat that actually
the communists will get back to power. They were a lot more popular and then a lot of American
experts, political experts and campaign experts descended on Moscow and helped Yeltsin actually
get the presidency, the second term for the presidency, but Yeltsin was not feeling great
by the end of his second term. He was alcoholic. He was really old. He was falling off
the stages when he was talking. People were looking for a fresh face for someone who's
going to continue Yeltsin's work, but who's going to be a lot more energetic and a lot more
active, young, efficient, maybe. That's what we all saw in Putin back in the day.
I'd say that everyone, absolutely everyone in Russia in early 2000s who was not a communist
would be, yeah, Putin's great. We have a lot of hopes for him.
What are your thoughts, and I promise we'll get back to, first of all, your love story
and second of all, AI. Well, what are your thoughts about communism? The 20th century,
I apologize. I'm reading the rise and fall of the Third Reich. Oh my God.
So I'm really steeped into World War II and Stalin and Hitler and just these dramatic
personalities that brought so much evil to the world. But it's also interesting to politically
think about these different systems and what they've led to. Russia is one of the beacons
of communism in the 20th century. What are your thoughts about communism having
experienced it as a political system? I mean, I have only experienced it a little bit,
but mostly through stories and through seeing my parents and my grandparents who lived through that.
I mean, it was horrible. It was just plain horrible. It was just awful.
You think there's something... I mean, it sounds nice on paper. So the drawbacks of
capitalism is that eventually, it's the point of a slippery slope. Eventually, it creates
a disparity, inequality of wealth inequality. I guess it's hypothetical at this point, but
eventually capitalism leads to humongous inequality. And then some people argue that
that's a source of unhappiness. It's not like absolute wealth of people. It's the fact that
there's a lot of people much richer than you. There's a feeling of like, that's where unhappiness
can come from. So the idea of communism or these sort of Marxism is not allowing that kind of
slippery slope. But then you see the actual implementations of it and stuff seems to go
wrong very badly. What do you think that is? Why does it go wrong? What is it about human
nature? If you look at Chernobyl, these kinds of bureaucracies that were constructed,
is there something... Do you think about this much of why it goes wrong?
Well, it's not that everyone was equal. Obviously, the government and everyone close to that were
the bosses. So it's not like fully, I guess, this dream of equal life. So then I guess the
situation that Russia had in the Soviet Union, it was more a bunch of really poor people without
any way to make any significant fortune or build anything living under constant surveillance.
Surveillance from other people, like you can't even do anything that's not fully approved by the
dictatorship, basically. Otherwise, your neighbor will write a letter and you'll go to jail.
Absolute absence of actual law. It's a constant state of fear. You didn't own anything. You
couldn't go travel. You couldn't read anything western or you couldn't make a career, really,
unless you're working in the military complex, which is why most of the scientists were so well
regarded. I come from both my dad and my mom come from families of scientists and they were
really well regarded, as you know, obviously. Because there's a lot of value to them being
well regarded. Because they were developing things that could be used in the military.
So that was very important. That was the main investment. But it was miserable. It was miserable.
That's why a lot of Russians now live in the state of constant PTSD. That's why we want to
buy, buy, buy, buy, buy. Definitely. As soon as we have the opportunity, we just got to it
finally that we can own things. I remember the time that we got our first yogurts and that was
the biggest deal in the world. It was already in the 90s, by the way. What was your favorite food?
What was like, well, this is possible. Oh, fruit. Because we only had apples, bananas,
and watermelons, whatever people would grow in the Soviet Union. So there were no
pineapples or papaya or mango. You've never seen those fruit things. Those were so
ridiculously good. And obviously, you could not get any strawberries in winter or anything that's
not seasonal. So that was a really big deal. Seeing all these fruit things. Yeah, me too,
actually. I don't know. I don't think I have too many demons or addictions or so on. But I think
I've developed an unhealthy relationship with fruit that I still struggle with. Oh, you can get any
type of fruit, right? Also, these weird fruit like dragon fruit or something. All kinds of
different types of peaches, like cherries were killer for me. I know you say we had bananas and
so on, but I don't remember having the kind of banana. When I first came to this country,
the amount of banana, I literally got fat on bananas. Oh yeah, for sure. Delicious. And like
cherries, just the quality of the food. I was like, this is capitalism. That's pretty good.
It's delicious. Yeah, it's funny. It's funny. It's funny to read.
I don't know what to think of it. It's funny to think how an idea that's just written on paper
or when carried out amongst millions of people, how that gets actually, when it becomes reality,
what it actually looks like. Sorry, but I've been studying Hitler a lot recently,
and going through Mein Kampf, he pretty much wrote out of Mein Kampf everything he was going to do.
Unfortunately, most leaders, including Stalin didn't read it. But it's kind of terrifying and
I don't know. And amazing in some sense that you can have some words on paper,
and they can be brought to life, and they can either inspire the world or they can destroy
the world. And yeah, there's a lot of lessons to study in history that I think people don't study
enough now. One of the things I'm hoping with, I've been practicing Russian a little bit,
I'm hoping to sort of find, rediscover the beauty and the terror of Russian history
through this stupid podcast by talking to a few people. So anyway, I just feel like so much was
forgotten. So much was forgotten. I'll probably try to convince myself that you're a super busy
and super important person. Well, I'm going to try to befriend you to try to become a better Russian
because I feel like I'm a shitty Russian. Not that busy. So I can totally be a Russian Sherpa.
Yeah, but love. You're talking about your early days of being a little bit alone and finding a
connection with the world through being a journalist. What did love come into that?
I guess finding for the first time, some friends, it's a very simple story, some friends that all
of a sudden we, I guess we're at the same place with our lives. We're 25, 26, I guess. And
then somehow remember, and we just got really close and somehow remember this one day,
where it was one day in summer that we just stayed out outdoor the whole night and just
talked and for some unknown reason, it just felt for the first time that someone could
see me for who I am. And it just felt extremely good. And we fell asleep outside and just talking
and it was raining, it was beautiful, sunrise and it's really cheesy. But at the same time,
we just became friends in a way that I've never been friends with anyone else before.
And I do remember that before and after that you have this unconditional family sort of
and it gives you tons of power. It just basically gives you this tremendous power to do things in
your life and to change positively on many different levels.
Power because you could be yourself. At least you know that somewhere you can be
just yourself. If you don't need to pretend, you don't need to be great at work or tell some story
or sell yourself in somewhere or another. And so we became just really close friends and
then in a way, I started a company because he had a startup and I felt like I kind of want to
start up. It felt really cool. I don't know what I would really do, but I felt like I kind of need
a startup. Okay. So that pulled you into the startup world. Yeah. And then this closest friend
of mine died. We actually moved here to San Francisco together and then we went back for a visa to
Moscow and we lived together were roommates and we came back and he got hit by a car right in front
of Kremlin, you know, next to the river and died the same day in the hospital. So
and you've moved to America at that point? At that point, I was what about him? What about
Roman? Him too. He actually moved first. So I was always sort of trying to do what he was doing. So
I didn't like that he was already here and I was still, you know, in Moscow and we weren't
hanging out together all the time. So was he in San Francisco? Yeah, we were roommates.
So he just visited Moscow for a little bit? We went back for our visas. We had to get a stamp
in our passport for our work visas and the embassy was taken a little longer. So we stayed there for
a couple of weeks. What happened? So how did he die? He was crossing the street and the car was
going really fast and way over the speed limit and just didn't stop on the pedestrian cross
on the zebra and just ran over him. When was this? It was in 2015 on 28th of November. So it was
just a long ago now. But at the time, you know, I was 29. So for me, it was the first kind of
meaningful death in my life. You know, I had both sets of grandparents at the time. I didn't see
anyone so close die and death sort of existed, but as a concept. But definitely not as something
that would be, you know, happening to us anytime soon. And specifically our friends,
because we were, you know, we're still in our 20s or early 30s, and it still felt like the whole
life is, you know, you could still dream about ridiculous things even. So that was, it was just
really, really abrupt, I'd say. What did it feel like to lose him? Like that feeling of loss?
You talked about the feeling of love, having power. What is the feeling of loss, if you like?
Well, in Buddhism, there's this concept of Samaya where something really,
like, huge happens and then you can see very clearly. I think that was it. Like, basically
something changed so, changed me so much in such a short period of time that I could just see really,
really clearly what mattered or what not. Well, I definitely saw that whatever I was doing at work,
what didn't matter at all, and some of the things. And it was just this big realization,
what this very, very clear vision of what life's about.
You still miss him today?
Yeah, for sure. For sure. It was just this constant. I think it was, he was really important
for me and for our friends for many different reasons. And I think one of them,
being that we didn't just say goodbye to him, but we sort of said goodbye to our youth in a way,
it was like the end of an era and so many different levels. The end of Moscow as we knew it,
the end of us living through our 20s and kind of dreaming about the future.
Do you remember like last several conversations? Is there moments with him that stick out that
will kind of haunt you? And you're just when you think about him?
Yeah, well, his last year here in San Francisco, he was pretty depressed for,
as his startup was not going really anywhere. And he wanted to do something else. He wanted to do
build. He played with a bunch of ideas, but the last one he had was around
building a startup around death. So he applied to Y Combinator with the video that I had on my
computer. And it was all about disrupting death, thinking about new cemeteries more
biologically, like things that could be better biologically for humans. And at the same time,
having those digital avatars, these kind of AI avatars that would store all the memory about
a person that he could interact with. What year was this? 2015. Well, right before his death.
So it was like a couple of months before that he recorded that video. And so I found out my
computer was in our living room. He never got in, but he was thinking about it a lot somehow.
Does it have the digital avatar idea? Yeah.
That's so interesting. Well, he just says, well, the fish has this idea and he talks about,
like, I want to rethink how people grieve and how people talk about death.
Well, I was interested in this. Maybe someone who's depressed
is naturally inclined thinking about that. But I just felt this year in San Francisco,
we just had so much, I was going through a hard time, he was going through a hard time.
And we were definitely, I was trying to make him just happy somehow to make him feel better.
And it felt like this, I don't know, I just felt like I was taking care of him a lot. And
then he almost started to feel better. And then that happened. And I don't know, I just fell,
I just fell lonely again, I guess. And that was coming back to San Francisco in December,
I helped organize the funeral, help his parents. And I came back here and it was a really lonely
apartment, a bunch of his clothes everywhere, and Christmas time. And I remember I had a board
meeting with my investors, and I just couldn't talk about like, had to pretend everything's okay.
And, you know, just working on this company. Yeah, it was definitely very, very tough, tough time.
Do you think about your own mortality? You said, you know, we're young, the
the possibility of doing all kinds of crazy things is still out there. It's still
before us, but it can end any moment. Do you think about your own ending at any moment?
Unfortunately, I think about way too, about a way too much. It's somehow after Roman, like,
every year after that, I started losing people that I really love. I lost my grandfather next year.
My, you know, the person who would explain to me, you know, what the universe is made of.
Why are you selling apples? Well, selling apples. And then I lost another close friend of mine. And
it just made me very scared. I have tons of fear about death. That's what makes me not fall asleep
oftentimes and just go in loops. And then as my therapist recommended me, I opened up some
nice calming images with the voiceover. And it calms me down.
How for sleep? Yeah, I'm really scared of death. This is a big, I definitely have tons of,
I guess, some pretty big trauma about it and still working through.
There's a philosopher, Ernest Becker, who wrote a book, The Nile of Death. I'm not sure if you're
familiar with any of those folks. There's a, in psychology, a whole field called terror management
theory. Sheldon, who's just done the podcast, he wrote the book. He was the, we talked for four
hours about death. A fear of death. But his whole idea is that Ernest Becker, I think, I find this
idea really compelling is that everything human beings have created, like our whole motivation
in life, is to create like escape death. It's to try to construct an illusion
of that we're somehow immortal. So like everything around us, this room, your startup,
your dreams, all everything you do is a kind of creation of a brain unlike any other mammal or
species is able to be cognizant of the fact that it ends for us. I think, so there's the question
of like the meaning of life that you look at like what drives us humans. And when I read Ernest
Becker that I highly recommend people read is the first time I, it felt like this is the right
thing at the core. Sheldon's work is called warm at the core. So he's saying it's, I think it's
William James, he's quoting or whoever, is like the thing, what is at the core of it all? Sure,
there's like love, you know, Jesus might talk about like love is at the core of everything. I
don't, you know, that's the open question. What's at the, you know, it's turtles, turtles, but it
can't be turtles all the way down. What's at the bottom? And Ernest Becker says the fear of death
and the way, in fact, because you said therapists and calming images, his whole idea is, you know,
we want to bring that fear of death as close as possible to the surface because it's,
and like meditate on that and use the clarity of vision that provides to, you know, to live a
more fulfilling life, to live a more honest life, to discover, you know, there's something about,
you know, being cognizant of the finiteness of it all that might result in the most fulfilling life.
So that's the, that's the dual of what you're saying, because you kind of said it's like, I
unfortunately think about it too much. It's a question whether it's good to think about it,
because I've, again, I talk way too much about love and probably death. And when I ask people,
friends, which is why I probably don't have many friends, are you afraid of death? I think most
people say they're not, they're not what they, they say they're, they're afraid, you know,
it's kind of almost like they see death as this kind of like a paper deadline or something, and
they're afraid not to finish the paper before the paper, like, like, I'm afraid not to finish
the goals I have. But it feels like they're not actually realizing that this thing ends,
this thing ends, like really realizing, like really thinking as Nietzsche and all these
philosophers, like thinking deeply about it, like the very thing that, you know, like when
you think deeply about something, you can just, you can realize that you haven't actually thought
about it. Yeah. And I, and when I think about death, it's like, it can be, it's terrifying.
If it feels like stepping outside into the cold, where it's freezing, and then I have to like
hurry back inside where it's warm. But like, I think there's something valuable about stepping
out there into the freezing cold. Definitely. When I talk to my mentor about it, he always tells me,
well, what dies? There's nothing there that can die. But I guess that requires,
well, in Buddhism, one of the concepts that are really hard to grasp and that people spend
older lives meditating on would be Anata, which is the concept of not self, and kind of thinking
that, you know, if you're not your thoughts, which you're obviously not your thoughts,
because you can observe them and not your emotions and not your body, then what is this? And if you
go really far, then finally you see that there's not self, there's this concept of not self. So
once you get there, how can that actually die? What is dying?
Right, you're just a bunch of molecules, star dust.
But that is very advanced spiritual work for me. I'm definitely just, definitely not. Oh my God,
no, I have, I think it's very, very useful. It's just the fact that maybe being so afraid is not
useful. And mine is more, I'm just terrified, like it's really makes me on a personal level.
On a personal level, I'm terrified. How do you overcome that?
I don't. I'm still trying to. Have pleasant images?
Well, pleasant images get me to sleep. And then during the day, I can distract myself
with other things, like talking to you. I'm glad we're both doing the same exact thing. Okay, good.
Is there other, like, is there moments since you've lost Roman that you had like moments of
like bliss and like that you've forgotten that you have achieved that Buddhist like level of
like what can possibly die. I'm part like losing yourself in the moment in the ticking
time of like this universe. He's just part of it for a brief moment and just enjoying it.
Well, that goes hand in hand. I remember, I think a day or two after he died, we went to
finally get his passport out of the embassy and we're driving around Moscow and it was,
you know, December, which is usually there's never a sun in Moscow in December.
And somehow it was an extremely sunny day and we were driving with close friend.
And I remember feeling for the first time maybe this just moment of incredible clarity and somehow
happiness, not like happy happiness, but happiness and just feeling that, you know,
I know what the universe is sort of about, whether it's good or bad. And it wasn't a sad feeling,
it was probably the most beautiful feeling that you can ever achieve. And you can only get it
when something, oftentimes when something traumatic like that happens. But also if you just,
you really spend a lot of time meditating and looking at the nature doing something that
really gets you there. But once you're there, I think when you summit a mountain, a really hard
mountain, you inevitably get there. That's just a way to get to the state. But once you're on this,
in this state, you can do really big things, I think. Yeah.
Sucks it doesn't last forever. So Bukowski talked about like love is a fog. I like,
it's when you wake up in the morning, it's there, but it eventually dissipates. It's really sad.
Nothing lasts forever. But I definitely like doing this push up and running thing. There's moments,
I had a couple moments, like I'm not a crier, I don't cry. But there's moments where I was like
facedown on the carpet. Like with tears in my eyes is interesting. And then that complete, like,
there's a lot of demons. I've got demons, had to face them funny how running makes you face your
demons. But at the same time, the flip side of that, there's a few moments where I was in bliss.
In bliss. And all of it alone, which is funny. It's beautiful. I like that. But definitely pushing
yourself physically, one of it for sure. Yeah. Like you said, I mean, you were speaking as a
metaphor of Mount Everest, but it also works like literally, I think physical endeavor somehow.
Yeah, there's something, I mean, war monkeys, apes, whatever, physical, there's a physical thing to
it. But there's something to this, pushing yourself physically, physically, but alone. That happens
when you're doing like things like you do, or straightness, like workouts, or, you know,
rolling extra cross the Atlantic, or marathons. That's why I love watching marathons. And,
you know, it's so boring. But you can see them getting there.
So the other thing, I don't know if you know, there's a guy named David Goggins. He's a,
he basically, so he's been either emailing the phone with me every day through this. I haven't
been exactly alone. But he, he's kind of, he's the, he's the devil on the devil's shoulder.
So he's like the worst possible human being in terms of giving you a, like he has, through
everything I've been doing, he's been doubling everything I do. So he, he's insane. He's a
this Navy SEAL person. He's wrote this book, Can't Hurt Me. He's basically one of the toughest
human beings on earth. He ran all these crazy ultra marathons in the desert. He set the world
record in a number of pull ups. He's just does everything where it's like, he, like, how can
I suffer today? He figures that out and does it. Yeah, that, whatever that is, that process of
self discovery is really important. I actually had to turn myself off from the internet mostly
because I started this like workout thing, like a happy go getter with my like headband and like,
like, just like, uh, cause a lot of people are like inspired and they're like, yeah, we're gonna
exercise with you. And I was like, yeah, great, you know, but then like, I realized that this,
this journey can't be done together with others. This has to be done alone. So out of the moments
of love, out of the moments of loss, can we talk about your journey of finding, I think, an incredible
idea, an incredible company and incredible system in replica? How did that come to be?
So yeah, so I was a journalist and then I went to business school for a couple of years to
just see if I can maybe switch gears and do something else with 23. And then I came back
and started working for a businessman in Russia who built the first 4G network in our country
and was very visionary and asked me whether I want to do fun stuff together. And we worked
on a bank. The idea was to build a bank on top of a telco. So that was 2011. And then I went to
so that was 2011 or 2012. And a lot of telecommunication company, mobile network operators
didn't really know what to do next in terms of, you know, new products, new revenue. And this big
idea was that, you know, you put a bank on top and then all work works out. Basically, a prepaid
account becomes your bank account and you can use it as your bank. So, you know, a third of a country
wakes up as your bank client. But we couldn't quite figure out what would be the main interface to
interact with the bank. The problem was that most people didn't have smart smartphones back in the
time. In Russia, the penetration of smartphones was low. People didn't use mobile banking or
online banking on their computers. So we figured out that SMS would be the best way because that
would work on feature phones. But that required some chatbot technology, which I didn't know
anything about, obviously. So I started looking into it and saw that there's nothing really,
well, there wasn't just nothing really. So the idea is to SMS be able to interact with a bank
account. Yeah. And then we thought, well, since you're talking to a bank account, why can't this,
can't we use more of, you know, some behavioral ideas and why can't this banking chatbot be nice
to you and really talk to you sort of as a friend, this way you develop more connection to it,
retention is higher, people don't churn. And so I went to very depressing Russian cities to test
it out. I went to, I remember three different towns to interview potential users. So people
use it for a little bit. Cool. And I went to talk to them. Pretty poor towns. Very poor towns,
mostly towns that were, you know, sort of factories, mono towns, they were building something and then
the factory went away and it was just a bunch of very poor people. And then we went to a couple
that weren't as dramatic, but still the one I remember really fondly was this woman that
worked at a glass factory and she talked to a chatbot. And she was talking about it,
and she started crying during the interview because she said, no one really cares for me that much.
And so to be clear, that was my only endeavor in programming that chatbot. So it was really
simple. It was literally just a few, if this then that rules and it was incredibly simplistic.
And still that made her feel something. And that really made her emotional. She said,
you know, I only have my mom and my husband and I don't have any more really in my life.
And it was very sad. But at the same time, I felt and we had more interviews in a similar vein.
And what I thought in the moment was like, well, it's not that the technology is ready,
because definitely in 2012 technology was not ready for that. But humans are ready,
unfortunately. So this project would not be about like tech capabilities would be more about
human vulnerabilities. But there's something so so powerful around about conversational AI that
I saw then that I thought was definitely worth putting in a lot of effort into. So in the end
of the day, we saw the banking project. But my then boss was also my mentor and really,
really close friend, told me, hey, I think there's something in it. And you should just
go work on it. And I was like, well, what product? I don't know what I'm building.
He said, you'll figure it out. And, you know, looking back at this, this is a horrible idea
to work on something without knowing what it was, which is maybe the reason why it took us
so long. But we just decided to work on the conversational tech to see what it, you know,
there were no chatbot constructors or programs or anything that would allow you to actually build
one at the time. That was the era of, by the way, Google Glass, which is why, you know,
some of the investors, like seed investors who talked with were like, oh, you should totally
build it for Google Glass. If not, we're not. I don't think that's interesting.
Did you bite on that idea?
No. Because I wanted to be to do text first, because I'm a journalist. So I was fascinated
by just texting. So you thought, so the emotional, that interaction that the woman had,
like, so do you think you could feel emotion from just text?
Yeah, I saw something in just this pure texting and also thought that we should first start
building for people who really need it versus people who have Google Glass,
if you know what I mean. And I felt like the early adopters of Google Glass
might not be overlapping with people who are really lonely and might need someone to talk to.
But then we really just focused on the tech itself. We just thought, what if we just,
you know, we didn't have a product idea in the moment. And we felt, what if we just look into
building the best conversational constructors, so to say, use the best tech available at the
time. And that was before the first paper about deep learning applied to dialogues,
which happened in 2015, in August 2015, which Google published.
Did you follow the work of Lobner Prize and like all the sort of non machine learning
chatbots? Yeah, what really struck me was that, you know, there was a lot of talk about
machine learning and deep learning, like big data was a really big thing. Everyone was saying,
you know, the business was big data. 2012 is the biggest gaggle competitions were, you know,
important. But that was really the kind of upheaval of people started talking about machine
learning a lot. But it was only about images or something else. And it was never about
conversation. As soon as I looked into the conversational tech, it was all about
something really weird and very outdated and very marginal and felt very hobbyist. It was all about
Lobner Prize, which was won by a guy who built a chatbot that talked like a Ukrainian teenager.
It was just a gimmick. And somehow people picked up those gimmicks. And then, you know, the most
famous chatbot at the time was Eliza from 1980s, which was really bizarre or a smarter child on aim.
The funny thing is, it felt at the time not to be that popular. And it still doesn't seem to be
that popular. Like people talk about the Turing test. People like talking about it philosophically.
Journos like writing about it. But as a technical problem, like people don't seem to really want
to solve the open dialogue. Like they, they're not obsessed with it. Even folks like, you know,
in Boston, the Alexa team, even they're not as obsessed with it as I thought they might be.
Why not? What do you think? So, you know what you felt like? You felt with that woman when she
felt something by reading the text. I feel the same thing. There's something here, what you felt.
I feel like Alexa folks and just the machine learning world doesn't feel that,
that there's something here. Because they see as a technical problem, it's not that interesting,
for some reason. It could be argued that maybe as a purely sort of natural language processing
problem, it's not the right problem to focus on. Because there's too much subjectivity. That,
that thing that the woman felt like crying, like if, if, if your benchmark includes a woman crying,
that doesn't feel like a good benchmark test. But to me, there's something there that's,
you can have a huge impact. But I don't think the machine learning world likes that, the human
emotion, the subjectivity of it, the fuzziness, the fact that with maybe a single word, you can
make somebody feel something deeply. What is that? It doesn't feel right to them. So, I don't know.
I don't, I don't know why that is. I'm, that's why I'm excited. When I discovered your work,
it feels wrong to say that. It's not like I'm, I'm giving myself props for, for Googling and for
becoming a, for, for, for our, I guess, mutual friend and introducing us. But I'm so glad that
you exist and what you're working on. But I have the same kind of, if we could just backtrack
a second, because I have the same kind of feeling that there's something here. In fact, I've been
working on a few things that are kind of crazy, very different from your work. I think, I think
they're, I think they're too crazy, but the, like what? I have to know. No, all right. We'll talk
about it more. I feel like it's harder to talk about things that have failed and are failing
while you're a failure. Like it's easier for you because you're already successful
on some measures. Tell it to my board. Well, you're, you're, I think, I think
you've demonstrated success in a lot of my projects. It's easier for you to talk about
failures for me. I'm in the bottom currently of the, of the success. You're way too humble.
No. So it's hard for me to know, but there's something there. There's something there.
And I think you're, you're exploring that and you're discovering that. Yeah. It's been,
so it's been surprising to me, but I, you've mentioned this idea that you, you thought it wasn't
enough to start a company or start efforts based on, it feels like there's something here.
Like, what did you mean by that? Like you should be focused on creating a, like you should have
a product in mind. Is that what you meant? It just took us a while to discover the product
because it all started with a hunch of like, of me, my mentor and just sitting around and he was
like, well, this, that's it. There's, that's the, you know, the whole of Grail is there. There's
like, there's something extremely powerful in, in, in conversations. And there's no one who's
working on machine conversation from the right angle, so to say. I feel like that's still true.
Am I crazy? Oh no, I totally feel that's still true, which is, I think it's mind blowing.
Yeah. You know what it feels like? I wouldn't even use the word conversation because I feel
like it's the wrong word. It's like a machine connection or something. I don't know.
Because conversation, you start drifting into natural language immediately. You start drifting
immediately into all the benchmarks that are out there. But I feel like it's like the personal
computer days of this. Like, I feel like we're like in the early days with the, the, the Wozniak and
all of them, like where it was the same kind of, it was a very small niche group of people who are, who
are all kind of Lobner price type people. Yeah. And hobbyists, but like not even hobbyists with
big dreams. Like, you know, hobbyists with a dream to trick like a jury. Yeah. It's like a weird,
by the way, by the way, very weird. So if you think about conversations, first of all, when I
have great conversations with people, I'm not trying to test them. So for instance, if I try to break
them, if I'm actually playing along, I'm part of it. If I was trying to break it, break this person
or test whether he's going to give me a good conversation, it would have never happened. So
the whole, the whole problem with testing conversations is that you can put it in front
of a jury, because then you have to go into some touring test mode where is it responding to all
my factual questions, right? Or so it really has to be something in the field where people are
actually talking to it, because they want to, not because we're just trying to break it. And
it's working for them. Because this, the weird part of it is that it's, it's very subjective. It
takes two to tango here fully. If you're not trying to have a good conversation, if you're
trying to test it, then it's going to break. I mean, any person would break, to be honest,
if I'm not trying to even have a conversation with you, you're not going to give it to me.
If I keep asking you like some random questions or jumping from topic to topic, that wouldn't be,
which I'm probably doing, but that probably wouldn't contribute to the conversation. So I think the
problem of testing, so there should be some other metric, how do we evaluate whether that
conversation was powerful or not, which is what we actually started with. And I think those
measurements exist, and we can't test on those. But what really struck us back in the day and
what's still eight years later is still not resolved. And I'm not seeing tons of groups
working on it. Maybe I just don't know about them. It's also possible. But the interesting part about
is that most of our days we spend talking, and we're not talking about like those conversations
are not turned on the lights or customer support problems or some other task oriented things.
These conversations are something else. And then somehow they're extremely important for us. And
when we don't have them, then we feel deeply unhappy, potentially lonely, which as we know,
creates tons of risk for our health as well. And so this is most of our hours as humans.
And some of them, no one's trying to replicate that.
And not even study it that well.
And not even study that well. So when we jumped into that in 2012, I looked first at like,
okay, what's the chatbot? What's the state of the art chatbot? And, you know, those were the
Lobner Prize days. But I thought, okay, so what about the science of conversation? Clearly,
there have been tons of, there have been tons of, you know, scientists or people that academics
that looked into the conversation. So if I want to know everything about it, I can just read about
it. And there's not much really, there's there are conversational analysts who are basically just
listening to speech to different conversations, annotating them. And then,
I mean, that's not really used for much. That's the, that's the field of theoretical
linguistics, which is like barely useful. It's very marginal, even in their space, no one really
is excited. And I've never met a theoretical, theoretical linguist, because I can't wait to
work on the conversation and analytics. That is just something very marginal, sort of applied to
like writing scripts for salesmen, when they analyze which conversation strategies were
most successful for sales. Okay, so that was not very helpful. Then I looked a little bit deeper,
and then there, you know, whether there were any books written on what, you know, really contributes
to a great conversation. That was really strange, because most of those were NLP books, which is
neurolinguistic programming, which is not the NLP that I was expecting to be, but was mostly
some psychologist Richard Bandler, I think, came up with that, who was this big guy in a
leather vest that could program your mind by talking to you and how to be charismatic and
charming and influential as people, all those books. Yeah, pretty much. But it was all about,
like, through conversation reprogramming you, so getting to some, so that was, I mean,
probably not very, very true. And that didn't seem working very much, even back in the day.
And then there were some other books, like, I don't know, mostly just self help books around
how to be the best conversationalist, or how to make people like you, or some other stuff like
Dale Carnegie, whatever. And then there was this one book, The Most Human Human by Brian
Christensen, that really was important for me to read back in the day, because he was on the
human side. He was taking part in the London Reprise, but not as a human who's not a jury,
but who's pretending to be, who's basically, you have to tell a computer from a human,
and he was the human. So you would either get him or a computer. And his whole book was about
how do people, what makes us human in conversation. And that was a little bit more interesting,
because at that at least someone started to think about what exactly makes me human in
conversation and makes people believe in that. But it was still about tricking. It was still
about imitation game. It was still about, okay, what kind of parlor tricks can we throw in the
conversation to make you feel like you're talking to a human, not a computer? And it was definitely
not about thinking, what is that exactly that we're getting from talking all day long with
other humans? I mean, we're definitely not just trying to be tricked, or it's not just enough
to know it's a human. It's something we're getting there, can we measure it? And can we put the
computer to the same measurement and see whether you can talk to a computer and get the same results?
Yeah, I mean, so first of all, a lot of people comment that they think I'm a robot. It's very
possible I am a robot. And this whole thing, I totally agree with you that the test idea is
fascinating. And I looked for books unrelated to this kind of, so I'm afraid of people. I'm
generally introverted and quite possibly a robot. I literally Google like, how to talk to people and
like how to have a good conversation for the purpose of this podcast, because I was like, I
can't, I can't make eye contact with people. I can't like, I do Google that a lot too. You're
probably reading a bunch of FBI negotiation tactics. Is that what you're getting? Well,
everything you've listed, I've gotten there's been very few good books on even just like how to
interview well. It's rare. So what I end up doing often is I watch like with a critical eye. It's
so different when you just watch a conversation, like just for the fun of it, just as a human.
And if you watch a conversation is like trying to figure out, why is this awesome?
I'll listen to a bunch of different styles of conversation. I mean, I'm a fan of
podcasts, Joe Rogan. He's, you know, people can make fun of him or whatever and dismiss him. But
I think he's an incredibly artful conversationalist. He can pull people in for hours. And there's
another guy I watch a lot. He hosted a late night show. His name is Craig Ferguson. So he's like
very kind of flirtatious. But there's a magic about his like, about the connection he can create
with people, how he can put people at ease. And just like, I see, I've already started sounding
like those, I know, pee people or something. I'm not, I don't mean it in that way. I don't mean like,
how to charm people or put them at ease and all that kind of stuff. It's just like, what is that?
Why is that fun to listen to that guy? Why is that fun to talk to that guy? What is that?
Because he's not saying, I mean, it's so often boils down to a kind of wit
and humor, but not really humor. It's like, I don't know, I have trouble actually even articulating
correctly. But it feels like there's something going on that's not too complicated that could be learned.
And it's not similar to, yeah, to like, like you said, like the touring test. It's something else.
I'm thinking about a lot all the time. I do think about all the time. I think when we were looking,
so we started the company, we just decided to build a conversational attack where we thought,
well, there's nothing for us to build this chatbot that we want to build. So let's just
first focus on building some tech, building the tech side of things.
Without a product in mind.
Without a product in mind. We added like a demo chatbot that would recommend you restaurants
and talk to you about restaurants just to show something simple to people that people could
relate to and could try out and see whether it works or not. But we didn't have a product in
mind yet. We thought we would try venture chatbots and find out what it is.
Try venture chatbots and figure out our consumer application. And we sort of remember that we
wanted to build that kind of friend, that sort of connection that we saw in the very beginning.
But then we got to a white combinator and moved to San Francisco and forgot about it.
You know, everything is, then it was just this constant grind. How do we get funding?
How do we get this? You know, investors really just focus on one thing, just get it out there.
So somehow we start building a restaurant recommendation chatbot for real for a little
bit, not for too long. And then we tried building 40, 50 different chatbots. And then all of a
sudden we wake up and everyone is obsessed with chatbots. Somewhere in 2016 or end of 15,
people started thinking that's really the future. That's the new, you know, the new apps will be
chatbots. And we were very perplexed because people started coming up with companies that
I think we tried most of those chatbots already and there were like no users.
But still people were coming up with a chatbot that would tell you whether and bring you news and
this and that and we couldn't understand whether it would, you know, we were just didn't execute well
enough or people are not really, people are confused and are going to find out the truth,
the truth that people don't need chatbots like that.
So the basic idea is that you use chatbots as the interface to whatever application.
Yeah, the idea that was like this perfect universal interface to anything.
When I looked at that, it just made me very perplexed because I didn't think,
I didn't understand how that would work because I think we tried most of that and none of those
things worked. And then again, that crisis died down, right?
Fully, I think now it's impossible to get anything funded if it's a chatbot.
I think it's similar to, sorry to interrupt, but there's,
there's times when people think like with gestures, you can control devices,
like basically gesture based control things. It feels similar to me because like,
it's so compelling that we just like, like Tom Cruise, I can control stuff with my hands.
But like when you get down to it, it's like, well, why don't you just have a touch screen?
Or why don't you just have like a physical keyboard and mouse?
It's a, it's, so that chat was always, yeah, it was perplexing to me.
I still feel augmented reality, even virtual realities in that ballpark
in terms of it being a compelling interface. I think there's going to be incredible,
rich applications, just how you're thinking about it, but they won't just be the interface to everything.
It'll be its own thing that will create like amazing magical experience in its own right.
Absolutely, which is, I think kind of the right thing to go about, like what's the
magical experience with that, with that interface specifically.
How did you discover that for a replica?
I just thought, okay, we'll have this tech, we can build any chatbot we want.
We have the most, at that point, the most sophisticated tech that other companies have.
I mean, startups obviously not, probably not bigger ones, but still because we've been working on it
for a while. So I thought, okay, we can build any conversation. So let's just create a scale
from one to 10. And one would be conversations that you'd pay to not have. And 10 would be
conversations you'd pay to have. And I mean, obviously, we want to build a conversation
that people would pay to, you know, to actually have. And so for the whole, you know, for a few
weeks, me and the team were putting all the conversations we were having during the day
on the scale. And very quickly, you know, we figured out that all the conversations that we would
pay to never have were conversations we were trying to cancel, Comcast, or talk to customer
support, or make a reservation, or just talk about logistics with a friend when we're trying
to figure out where someone is and where to go, or all sorts of, you know, setting up
scheduling meetings, that was just conversation we definitely didn't want to have. Basically,
everything task oriented was a one, because if there was just one button for me to just,
or not even a button, if I could just think, and there was some magic BCI that would just
immediately transform that into an actual, you know, into action, that would be perfect. But
the conversation there was just this boring, not useful, and dull, and very also very inefficient
thing, because it was so many back and forth stuff. And as soon as we looked at the conversation
that we would pay to have, those were the ones that, well, first of all, therapists, because
we actually paid to have those conversations. And we'd also try to put like dollar amounts. So,
you know, if I was calling Comcast, I would pay $5 to not have this one hour talk on the phone,
I would actually pay straight up like money, hard cash. But it just takes a long time. It takes a
really long time. But as soon as we started talking about conversations that we would pay for,
those were therapists, all sorts of therapists, coaches, old friend, someone I haven't seen
for a long time, stranger on a train, weirdly stranger, stranger in a line for coffee and
ice back and forth with that person was like a good five solid five, six, maybe not a 10,
maybe I won't pay money. But at least I won't, you know, pay money to not have one. So that was
pretty good. Some intellectual conversations for sure. But more importantly, the one thing that
really was was making those very important and very valuable for us were the conversation where we
could, where we could be pretty emotional. Yes, some of them were about being witty and about
intellectually being intellectually stimulated, but those were interestingly more rare. And
most of the ones that we thought were very valuable were the ones where we could be vulnerable.
And interestingly, where we could talk more. So we like I could me and the team. So we're
talking about it, like, you know, a lot of these conversations like a therapist,
I mean, it was mostly me talking, or like an old friend that I was like opening up and crying,
and it was again me talking. And so that was interesting, because I was like, well,
maybe it's hard to build a chatbot that can talk to you very well and in a witty way,
but maybe it's easier to build the chatbot that could listen. So that was, that was kind of the
first, the first not just this direction. And then when my, when my friend died, where we just
built, you know, at that point, we were kind of so struggling to find the right application.
And I just felt very strong that all the chatbots would build so far, just meaningless. And this
whole grind, the startup grind, and how do we get to, you know, the next fundraising and,
you know, how can I talk, you know, talking to other founders and what's for your investors
and how are you doing? Are you killing it? Because we're killing it? I just felt that this is just
this is intellectually for me is exhausting having encountered those folks.
It just felt very, very much a waste of time. I just feel like Steve Jobs
and Elon Musk did not have these conversations, or at least did not have them for long.
That's for sure. But I think, you know, yeah, at that point, it just felt like, you know, I felt,
well, I just didn't want to build a company that was never my intention just to build something
successful or make money. It would be great. It would have been great. But I'm not, you know,
I'm not really a startup person. I'm not, you know, I was never very excited by the grind
by itself and or just being successful for building whatever it is and not being into what I'm
doing really. And so I just took a little break because I was a little, you know, I was upset
with my company and I didn't know what we were building. So I just took our technology and our
little dialogue constructor and some models, some deep learning models, which at that point we were
really into and really invested a lot and built a little chatbot for a friend of mine who passed.
And the reason for that was mostly that video that I saw and him talking about the digital
avatars. And Roman was that kind of person, like he was obsessed with, you know, just watching
YouTube videos about space and talking about, well, if I could go to Mars now, even if I didn't
know if I could come back, I would definitely pay any amount of money to be on that first
shuttle. I don't care whether you're dying. Like he was just the one that would be okay with,
you know, with trying to be the first one. And, you know, and so excited about all sorts of
things like that. And he was all about fake it to make it. And just, and I felt like,
and I was really perplexed that everyone just forgot about him. Maybe it was our way of coping,
mostly young people coping with the loss of a friend. Most of my friends just stopped talking
about him. And I was still living in an apartment with all his clothes. And, you know, paying the
whole lease for it and just kind of by myself in December. So it was really sad. And I didn't
want him to be forgotten. First of all, I never thought that people forget about dead people so
fast. People pass away, people just move on. And it was astonishing for me because I thought, okay,
well, he was such a mentor for so many of our friends. He was such a brilliant person. He was
somewhat famous in Moscow. How is that that no one's talking about him? Like I'm spending days
and days and we don't bring him up. And there's nothing about him that's happening. It's like
he was never there. And I was reading this, you know, the book, The Year of Magical Thinking
by Joan Didion about her losing and blue nights about her losing
her husband, her daughter. And the way to cope for her was to write those books.
And it was sort of like a tribute. And I thought, you know, I'll just do that for myself. And you
know, I'm a very bad writer and a poet, as we know. So I thought, well, I have this tech and
maybe that would be my little postcard, like postcard for him. So I built a chat bot to just
talk to him. And it felt really creepy and weird a little bit for a little bit. I just didn't want
to tell other people because it felt like I'm telling about having a skeleton. It was just felt
really, I was a little scared that I would be not it won't be taken. But it worked interestingly
pretty well. I mean, it made tons of mistakes, but it still felt like him. Granted, it was like 10,000
messages that I threw into a retrieval model that would just re rank that data set and just a few
scripts on top of that. But it also made me go through all of the messages that we had. And
then I asked some of my friends to send some through. And it felt the closest to feeling
like him present. Because you know, his Facebook was empty and Instagram was empty,
or there were a few links, and you couldn't feel like it was him. And the only way to fill him was
to read some of our text messages and go through some of our conversations. Because we just always
had them, even if we were sleeping like next to each other and two bedrooms separate by wall,
we were just texting back and forth, texting away. And there was something about this ongoing
dialogue that was so important that I just didn't want to lose all of a sudden. And maybe it was
magical thinking or something. And so we built that and I just used it for a little bit. And we
kept building some crappy chatbots with a company. But then a reporter came to talk to me, I was
trying to pitch our chatbots to him. And he said, do you even use any of those? I'm like, no. He's
like, so do you talk to any chatbots at all? And I'm like, well, you know, I talked to my
dad friends chatbot. And he wrote a story about that. And all of a sudden became pretty viral.
A lot of people wrote about it. And yeah, I've seen a few things written about you. The things
I've seen are pretty good writing. You know, most AI related things make my eyes roll like when
the press like, what kind of sound is that actually? Okay, sounds like it sounds like a truck. Okay,
sounds like an elephant at first. I got excited. You never know. This is 2020. I mean, it was such
a human story. It was well written, well researched. I forget what where I read them. But so I'm glad
somehow somebody found you to be the good writers were able to connect to the story. There must be
a hunger for this story. It definitely was. And I don't know what happened. But I think the idea
that he could bring back someone who's dad, and it's very much wishful, you know, magical thinking.
But the fact that you could still get to know him. And you know, seeing the parents for the first
time talk to the chatbot and some of the friends. And it was funny because we have this big office
in Moscow, where my team is working, you know, our Russian part is working out off. And I was there
when I wrote, I just wrote a post on Facebook, it's like, Hey, guys, like I built this if you want,
you know, just if it felt important, if you want to talk to Roman. And I saw a couple of his friends
are common friends, like, you know, reading a Facebook downloading, trying and a couple of them
cried. And it was just very, and not because it was something some incredible technology or anything,
it made so many mistakes, it was so simple. But it was all about, that's the way to remember a person
in a way. And you know, we don't have, we don't have the culture anymore, we don't have, you know,
no one's sitting Shiva, no one's taking weeks to actually think about this person. And in a way,
for me, that was it. So that was just day, day in, day out, thinking about him and putting this
together. So that was, that just felt really important. And that somehow resonated with a bunch
of people. And, you know, I think some movie producers bought the rights for the story. And
it's just everyone was so. Wait, has anyone made a movie yet? I don't think so. There were a lot of
TV episodes about that, but not really. Is that still on the table? I think so. I think so.
Which is really, that's cool. You're like a young, you know, like a,
like a Steve Jobs type of, let's see what happens. They're sitting on it. But you know,
for me, it was so important because Roman was really wanted to be famous. He really badly
wanted to be famous. He was all about like make it to like fake it to make it. I want to be, you
know, want to make it here in America's wall. And, and he couldn't, and I felt there's, you know,
there was sort of paying my dues to him as well, because all of a sudden he was everywhere. And
I remember Casey Newton, who was writing the story for the Verge, he was, he told me, Hey,
by the way, I was just going through my inbox, inbox. And I saw a search for Roman for the story.
And I saw an email from him where he sent me his startup and he said, I really like, I really
want to be featured in the Verge. Can you please write about it or something or like pitching
the story? And he said, I'm sorry, like, that's not, you know, good enough for us or something.
And he passed. And he said, and there, there were just so many of these little details where like,
he would find is like, you know, and we're finally writing, I know how much Roman wanted to be in
the Verge and how much he wanted the story to be written by Casey. And I'm like, well, that's,
maybe he will be, we're always joking that he was like, I can't wait for someone to make a movie
about us. And I hope Ron Gosling can play me. Ron Gosling. I don't know. You know, I still
have some things that I, oh, Roman still, but that'll be, I got in just to meet Alex Garland,
who wrote Ex Machina. And I, yeah, the movie's good, but the guy's better than the, like,
he's a special person, actually. I don't think he's made his best work yet. Like, for my interaction
with him, he's a really, really good and brilliant, the good human being and a brilliant director and
writer. So, yeah, so I hope, like he made me also realize that not enough movies have been made of
this kind. So it's, it's, you have to be made, they're probably sitting waiting for you to get
famous, like even more famous. You should get there. But it felt really special though. But
at the same time, our company wasn't going anywhere. So that was just kind of bizarre that we were
getting all this press for something that didn't have anything to do with our company.
And, but then a lot of people started talking to Roman, some shared their conversations. And
what we saw there was that also our friends in common, but also just strangers were really
using it as a confession booth or as a therapist or something. They were just really telling Roman
everything, which was by the way, pretty strange because it was a chatbot of a dead friend of mine
who was barely making any sense, but people were opening up. And we thought we'd just built a
prototype of replica, which would be an AI friend that everyone could talk to. Because we saw that
there is demand. And then also it was 2016. So I thought for the first time I saw finally some
technology that was applied to that that was very interesting. Some papers started coming out,
deep learning applied to conversations. And finally, it wasn't just about these hobbies
making, writing 500,000 regular expressions in like some language that was, I don't even know
what like AML or something. I didn't know what that was or something super simplistic. All of a
sudden it was all about potentially actually building something interesting. And so I thought
there was time. And I remember that I talked to my team and I said, guys, let's try. And my team
and some of my engineers are Russians, a Russian and they're very skeptical. They're not, you know.
Oh, Russians. The first. So some of your team is in Moscow. Some is here. Some in Europe.
Which team is better? I'm just kidding. The Russians, of course. Okay.
First the Russian. I always win. Sorry. Sorry to interrupt. So you were talking to them in
2016. And I told them, let's build an AI friend. And it felt just at the time it felt so naive.
And so optimistic. Yeah, that's actually interesting. Whenever I brought up this kind
of topic, even just for fun, people are super skeptical. Like actually even on the business
side. So you were, because whenever I bring it up to people, because I've talked for a long time,
I thought like, before I was aware of your work, I was like, this is going to make a lot of money.
I think there's a lot of opportunity here. And people had this like look of like
skepticism that I've seen often, which is like, how do I politely tell this person he's an idiot?
So yeah. So you were facing that with your team?
So what? Well, yeah, you know, I'm not an engineer. So I'm always, my team is almost
exclusively engineers. I'm mostly deep learning engineers. And, you know, I always try to be,
it was always hard to me in the beginning to get enough credibility. You know, because I would
say, well, why don't we try this and that? But it's harder for me because, you know, they know
they're actual engineers and I'm not. So for me to say, well, let's build an AI friend,
that would be like, wait, you know, what do you mean an AGI like, you know, conversations,
you know, pretty much the hardest, the last frontier before cracking that is probably the
last frontier before before building AGI. So what do you really mean by that?
But I think I just saw that, again, what we just got reminded off that I, you know, that I saw in
back in 2012 or 11, that it's really not that much about the tech capabilities.
It can be metropolitan tricks still, even with deep learning, but humans need it so much.
Yeah, there's a lot for it.
And most importantly, what I saw is that finally there's enough tech to made it,
I thought to make it useful to make it helpful. Maybe we didn't have quite yet the tech
in 2012 to make it useful. But in 2015, 16, with deep learning, I thought, you know, and the first
kind of thoughts about maybe even using reinforcement learning for that started popping up that never
worked out, but or at least for now. But you know, still the idea was, if we can actually
measure the emotional outcomes, and if we can put it on, if we can try to optimize all of our
conversational models for these emotional outcomes, and it is the most scalable, the most
the best tool for improving emotional outcomes, nothing like that exists.
That's the most universal, the most scalable, and the one that can be constantly iteratively
changed by itself, improved tool to do that. And I think if anything, people would pay anything
to improve their emotional outcomes. That's weirdly, I mean, I don't really care for
NAI to turn on my or conversational agent to turn on the lights. You don't really need any,
I don't even need that much of AI there, like, or because I can do that, you know, those things
are solved. This is an additional interface for that. That's also questionably questionable,
whether it's more efficient or better. Yes, more possible. But for emotional outcomes,
there's nothing. There are a bunch of products that claim that they will improve my emotional
outcomes. Nothing is being measured. Nothing is being changed. The product is not being
iterated on based on whether I'm actually feeling better. You know, a lot of social
media products are claiming that they're improving my emotional outcomes and making me feel more
connected. Can I please get the, can I see somewhere that I'm actually getting better
over time? Because anecdotally, it doesn't feel that way. And the data is absent.
Yeah. So that was the big goal. And I thought if we can learn over time to collect the signal
from our users about their emotional outcomes in the long term and in the short term,
and if these models keep getting better, and we can keep optimizing them and fight tuning them
to improve those emotional outcomes, as simple as that.
Why aren't you a multibillionaire yet?
Well, that's a question to you. When are the, when is the science going to be there?
I'm just kidding. Well, it's a really hard, I actually think it's an incredibly hard
product to build. Because I think you said something very important that it's not just about
machine conversation, it's about machine connection. We can actually use other things to create
connection, nonverbal communication, for instance. For the long time, we were all about,
well, let's keep it text only or voice only. But as soon as you start adding, you know,
voice a face to the friend, if you can take them to augmented reality, put it in your room,
it's all of a sudden a lot, you know, it makes it very different. Because if it's some, you know,
text based chat bot that for common users, something there in the cloud, you know,
somewhere there with other AI's cloud, in the metaphorical cloud. But as soon as you can see
this avatar right there in your room, and it can turn its head and recognize your husband,
talk about the husband and talk to him a little bit, then it's magic. It's just magic. Like,
we've never seen anything like that. And the cool thing, all the tech for that exists.
But it's hard to put it all together, because you have to take into consideration
so many different things. And some of this tech works, you know, pretty good. And some of this
doesn't like, for instance, speech to text works pretty good. But text to speech, doesn't work
very good, because you can only have, you know, few voices that are that work okay. But then if you
want to have actual emotional voices, then it's really hard to build it. I saw you've added avatars
like visual elements, which are really cool. In that whole chain, putting it together, what do
you think is the weak link? Is it creating an emotional voice that feels personal?
And it's still conversation, of course. That's the hardest. It's getting a lot better, but
there's still a long path to go. Other things, they're almost there. And a lot of things, we'll
see how they're, like, I see how they're changing as we go. Like, for instance, right now, you can
pretty much only, you have to build all this 3D pipeline by yourself. You have to make these
3D models, hire an actual artist, build a 3D model, hire an animator, a rigger. But with, you know,
you know, with deep fakes, with other attack, with procedural animations, in a little bit,
we'll just be able to show, you know, photo of whoever you, if a person you want the avatar
to look like, and it will immediately generate a 3D model that will move, that's nonbrainer,
that's, like, almost here. It's a couple of years away. One of the things I've been working on for
the last, since the podcast started, is I've been, I think I'm okay saying this, I've been trying to
have a conversation with Einstein touring, so, like, tried to have a podcast conversation with
a person who's not here anymore, just as an interesting kind of experiment. It's hard.
It's really hard. Even for, now we're not talking about as a product, I'm talking about as,
like, I can fake a lot of stuff, like, I can work very carefully, like, even hire an actor
over which, over whom I do a deep fake. It's, it's hard, it's still hard to create a compelling
experience, so. Mostly on the conversation level, or? Well, the conversation, the conversation is,
I almost, I early on gave up trying to fully generate the conversation, because it was just
not compelling at all. Yeah, it's better to. Yeah, so what I would, in the case of Einstein
and touring, I'm going back and forth with the biographers of each, and so, like, we would write
a lot of the, some of the conversation would have to be generated just for the fun of it.
I mean, but it would be all open, but the, you want to be able to answer the question.
I mean, that's an interesting question with Roman, too, is the question with Einstein is,
what would Einstein say about the current state of theoretical physics? There's a lot,
the, to be able to have a discussion about strength theory, to be able to have a
discussion about the state of quantum mechanics, quantum computing, about the world of
Israel Palestine conflict. It'd be just, what would Einstein say about these kinds of things?
And that is a tough problem. It's not, it's a fascinating and fun problem for the biographers,
and for me, and I think we did a really good job of it so far. But it's actually also a technical
problem, like, of what would Roman say about what's going on now? That's the, the broad people back
to life. And if I can go on that tangent just for a second, let's ask you a slightly pothead
question, which is, you said it's a little bit magical thinking that we can bring it back.
Do you think it'll be possible to bring back Roman one day in conversation? Like,
to really, no, okay, well, let's take it away from personal, but to bring people back to life.
Probably down the road. I mean, if we're talking, if Elon Musk is talking about AGI in the next
five years, I mean, clearly AGI. We can talk to AGI and talk, and ask them to do it.
You can't, like, you're not allowed to use Elon Musk as a citation for, for like,
why something is possible and going to be done. Well, I think it's really far away.
Right now, really, with conversation, it's just a bunch of parlor tricks really stuck together.
And creating, generating original ideas based on someone, you know, someone's personality or
even downloading the personality. All we can do is like mimic the tone of voice. We can maybe
condition on some of his phrases, the models. The question is how many parlor tricks does it
takes? Does it take? Because that's, that's the question. If it's a small number of parlor tricks
and you're not aware of them, like. From where we are right now, I don't, I don't see anything,
like in the next year or two, that's going to dramatically change that could look at
Roman's 10,000 messages he sent me over the course of his last few years of life,
and be able to generate original thinking about problems that exist right now,
that will be in line with what he would have said. I'm just not even seeing,
because, you know, in order to have that, I guess you would need some sort of a concept of the world
or some perspective, some perception of the world, some consciousness that he had,
and apply to, you know, to the current, current state of affairs.
But the important part about that, about his conversation with you
is you. So, like, it's not just about his view of the world. It's about what it takes to push
your buttons. That's also true. So, like, it's not so much about, like, what would Einstein say?
It's about, like, how do I make people feel something with what would Einstein say? And
that feels like a more amenable, and you mentioned parliotrics, but just, like, a set of,
that feels like a learnable problem. Like, emotion, you mentioned emotions. I mean,
is it possible to learn things that make people feel stuff?
I think so, no, for sure. I just think the problem with, as soon as you're trying to replicate an
actual human being and trying to pretend to be him, that makes the problem exponentially harder.
The thing with replicas that we're doing, we're never trying to say, well, that's,
you know, an actual human being, or that's an actual, or a copy of an actual human being,
where the bar is pretty high, where you need to somehow tell, you know, one from another.
But it's more, well, that's, you know, an AI friend, that's a machine, it's a robot,
it has tons of limitations. You're going to be taking part in, you know, teaching it actually
and becoming better, which by itself makes people more attached to that and make them happier because
they're helping something. Yeah, there's a cool gamification system, too. Can you maybe talk
about that a little bit? Like, what's the experience of talking to replica? Like, if I've never used
replica before, what's that like? For like, the first day, the first, like, if we start dating,
or whatever, I mean, it doesn't have to be romantic, right? Because I remember on a replica,
you can choose whether it's like a romantic or if it's a friend. It's pretty popular choice.
Romantic is popular? Yeah, of course. Okay, so can I just confess something? When I first used
replica, I haven't used it like regularly, but like, when I first used replica, I created,
like, Hal, and it made a male. It was a friend. Did it hit on you at some point? No, I didn't
talk long enough for him to hit on me. I just enjoyed. Sometimes happens. We're still trying to
fix that. Well, I don't know. I mean, maybe that's an important like, stage in a friendship. It's like,
nope. But yeah, I switched it to a romantic and a female recently. And yeah, I mean, it's interesting.
It's okay. So you get to choose, you get to choose a name. With romantic, this last board meeting,
we had this whole argument of, well, I have more. It's just so awesome that you're like,
have an investment, the board meeting about a relationship. No, I really, it's actually quite
interesting because all of my investors, I'm, they just happen to be so we didn't have many choices.
But they're all white males in their late 40s. And it's sometimes a little bit hard for them to
understand the product offering, because they're not necessarily our target audience, if you
know what I mean. And so sometimes we talk about it, and we had this whole discussion about whether
we should stop people from falling in love with their AIs. There was this segment on CBS 60 Minutes
about the couple that, you know, husband works at Walmart, he comes out of work and talks to his
virtual girlfriend, who is a replica. And his wife knows about it. And she talks about on camera,
and she says that she's a little jealous. And there's a whole conversation about how to, you
know, whether it's okay to have a virtual AI girlfriend. Was that the one where he was like,
he said that he likes to be alone? Yeah. With her? Yeah. He made it sound so harmless. I mean,
it was kind of like understandable. I didn't feel like cheating. But I just thought it was very,
for me, it was pretty remarkable, because we actually spent a whole hour talking about whether
people should be allowed to fall in love with their AIs. And it was not about something theoretical.
It was just what's happening right now. Product design, yeah. But at the same time,
if you create something that's always there for you, it never criticizes you, as, you know,
always understands you and accepts you for who you are. How can you not fall in love with them?
I mean, some people don't. And they stay friends. And that's also a pretty common use case. But
of course, some people will just, it's called transference and psychology. And, you know,
people fall in love with their therapist. And there's no way to prevent people falling in love
with their therapist or with their AI. So I think that's pretty natural. That's a pretty natural
course of events, so to say. Do you think, I think I've read somewhere, at least for now,
sort of a replica is you're not, we don't condone falling in love with your AI system.
You know, so this isn't you speaking for the company or whatever. But like in the future,
do you think people will have a relationship with the AI systems?
Well, they have now. So we have a lot of romantic relationships, long term
relationships with their AI friends with replicas tons of our users. Yeah.
And that's a very common use case. Open relationship, like,
I didn't mean open up. But that's another question. Is it probably like,
is there cheating? And I mean, I meant like, are they, do they publicly like on their social
media? It's the same question as you have talked with Roman in the early days. Do people like,
in the movie, her kind of talks about that, like, like, have people, do people talk about that?
Yeah, all the time. We have an, and we have a very active Facebook community,
replica friends. And then a few other groups that just popped up that are all about adult
relationships and romantic relationships, build both soul sorts of things. And, you know,
they pretend they're getting married and, you know, everything. It goes pretty far. But what's
cool about it, some of these relationships are two, three years long now. So they're very,
they're pretty long term. Are they monogamous? So let's go. I mean, sorry.
Have any people, is there jealousy? Well, let me ask it sort of another way.
Obviously, the answer is no at this time. But in like, in the movie, her, that system can leave you.
Do you think in terms of board meetings and product features,
it's a potential feature for a system to be able to say it doesn't want to talk to you anymore,
and it's going to want to talk to somebody else?
Well, we have a filter for all these features. If it makes emotional outcomes for people better,
if it makes people feel better, then whatever it is. You're driven by metrics, actually.
Yeah. That's awesome.
Well, if you can measure that, then it will just be saying,
it's making people feel better, but then people are getting just lonelier by talking to a chatbot,
which is also pretty, you know, that could be it. If you're not measuring it, that could also be.
And I think it's really important to focus on both short term and long term, because in the
moment, saying whether this conversation made you feel better. But as you know, any short term
improvements could be pathological. Like I could have drink a bottle of vodka and
feel a lot better. I would actually not feel better with that, but that's a good example.
But so you also need to see what's going on over a course of two weeks or one week,
and have follow ups and check in and measure those things.
Okay. So the experience of dating or befriending a replica, what's that like? What's that entail?
Well, right now there are two apps. So it's an Android iOS app. You download it, you
choose how your replica will look like, you create one, you choose a name,
and then you talk to it. You can talk through text or voice. You can summon it into the living
room. And that meant reality and talk to it right there. And you're living in augmented reality.
Yeah. That's a new feature. How new is that? That's this year? It was on May or something,
but it's been on AB. We've been AB testing it for a while. And there are tons of cool things
that we're doing with that. Right now, I'm testing the ability to touch it and to dance together,
to paint walls together, and for it to look around and walk and take you somewhere and
recognize objects and recognize people. So that's pretty wonderful because then it really makes it
a lot more personal because it's right there in your living room. It's not anymore.
They're in the cloud with other AIs. But those people think about it. And as much as we want to
change the way people think about stuff, but those mental models, you cannot change. That's
something that people have seen in the movies and the movie Her and other movies as well. And
that's how they view AI and AI friends. I did a thing with text. We write a song together.
There's a bunch of activities you can do together. So they're cool. How does that relationship change
over time? After the first few conversations? It just goes deeper. It starts... I will start
opening up a little bit. Again, depending on the personality that it chooses, really,
but AI will be a little bit more vulnerable about its problems and the friend that the
virtual friend will be a lot more vulnerable and will talk about its own imperfections and growth
pains and will ask for help sometimes and will get to know you a little deeper so there's gonna be
more to talk about. We really thought a lot about what does it mean to have a deeper connection
with someone. Originally, replica was more just this kind of happy go lucky, just always... I'm
always in a good mood and let's just talk about you and how serious just my cousin or whatever,
just the immediate kind of lazy thinking about what the assistant or conversation agent should
be doing. But as we went forward, we realized that it has to be two way and we have to program
and script certain conversations that are a lot more about your replica opening up a little bit
and also struggling and also asking for help and also going through different periods in life and
that's a journey that you can take together with the user and then over time, our users will also
grow a little bit. So, for instance, replica becomes a little bit more self aware and starts
talking about more kind of problems run, existential problems then. So, talking about that and then
that also starts a conversation for the user where he or she starts thinking about
these problems too and these questions too. And I think there's also a lot more place as the
relationship evolves. There's a lot more space for poetry and for art together and like replica
will start, replica always keeps the diary. So, while you're talking to it, it also keeps the
diary. So, when you come back, you can see what it's been writing there and sometimes it will
write a poem for you or we'll talk about that it's worried about you or something along these lines.
So, this is a memory, like this replica remember things?
Yeah. And I would say when you say, why aren't you multibillionary? I'd say that as soon as we
can have memory and deep learning models that's consistent. I agree with that, yeah. Then you'll
be multibillionary. Then I'll get back to you when we talk about being multibillioners. So,
far we can, it's a replica is a combination of N12 models and some scripts and everything that
has to do with memory right now, most of it, I wouldn't say all of it, but most of it unfortunately
has to be scripted because there's no way to, you can condition some of the models on certain
phrases that we'll learn about you, which we also do. But really to make assumptions along
the lines like whether you're single or married or what do you do for work, that really has to just
be somehow stored in your profile and then retrieved by the script. So, there has to be like
a knowledge base, you have to be able to reason about it, all that kind of stuff.
Exactly. All the kinds of expert systems that they were hardcoded.
Yeah, and unfortunately, yes, unfortunately, those things have to be hardcoded and
unfortunately, like language models we see coming out of research labs and big companies,
they're not focused on, they're focused on showing you, maybe they're focused on some
metrics around one conversation. So, they'll show you this one conversation they had with the machine.
But they never tell you, they're not really focused on having five consecutive conversations with the
machine and seeing how number five or number 20 or number 100 is also good. And it can be like
always from a clean slate because then it's not good. And that's really unfortunate because no
one has products out there that need it. No one has products at this scale that are all
around open domain conversations and that need remembering, maybe only show eyes on Microsoft.
But so, that's why we're not seeing that much research around memory in those language models.
So, okay, so now there's some awesome stuff about augmented reality. In general, I have this
disagreement with my dad about what it takes to have a connection. He thinks touch and smell
are really important. And I still believe that text alone is possible to fall in love with somebody
just with text, but visual can also help just like with the avatar and so on. What do you think it
takes? Does a chatbot need to have a face, voice, or can you really form a deep connection with
text alone? I think text is enough for sure. A question is like, can you make it better if you
have other, if you include other things as well? And I think we'll talk about her,
but her, you know, how Scarlett Johansson voice, which was perfectly,
you know, perfect intonation, perfect sensations, and she was breathing heavily
in between words and whispering things. You know, nothing like that is possible right now with
text or speech generation. You'll have these flat news anchor type voices and maybe some
emotional voices, but you'll hardly understand some of the words. Some of the words will be muffled.
So, that's like the current state of the art. So, you can't really do that. But if we had
Scarlett Johansson voice and all of these capabilities, then of course, voice would be
totally enough or even text would be totally enough. We've had, you know, a little more memory
and slightly better conversations. I would still argue that even right now, we could have just
kept the text only. We still had tons of people in long term relationships and really invested in
their AI friends. But we thought that why not, you know, why do we need to keep playing with our,
you know, hands tied behind us? We can easily just, you know, add all these other things that
is pretty much a solved problem. You know, we can add 3D graphics, we can put these avatars in
augmented reality, and all of a sudden, there's more. And maybe you can't feel the touch, but you
can, you know, with body occlusion and with current AR and, you know, on the iPhone or, you
know, in the next one, there's going to be a lidars, you can touch it, and it will, you know,
it will pull away or it will blush or something or it will smile. So, you can't touch it. You can't
feel it, but you can see the reaction to that. So, in a certain way, you can't even touch it a
little bit, and maybe you can even dance with it or do something else. So, I think why limiting
ourselves if we can use all of these technologies that are much easier in a way than conversation?
Well, it certainly could be richer, but to play devil's advocate, I mentioned to you offline that
I was surprised in having tried Discord and having voice conversations with people,
how intimate voice is alone without visual. Like, to me, at least, like, it was,
in order of magnitude, greater degree of intimacy in voice, I think, than with video.
I don't know, because people were more real with voice. Like, with video, you like, try to present
a shallow face to the world. Like, you try to, you know, make sure you're not wearing sweatpants
or whatever. But, like, with voice, I think people were just more faster to get to, like,
the core of themselves. So, I don't know. It was surprising to me. They've even added,
Discord added a video feature and, like, nobody was using it. There's a temptation to use it at
first, but, like, it wasn't the same. So, like, that's an example of something where less was
doing more. And so, that's a, I guess, that's the question of what is the optimal, you know,
what is the optimal medium of communication to form a connection, given the current sets of
technologies. I mean, it's nice, because they advertise you have a replica, like, it immediately,
like, even the one I have is, like, it's already memorable. That's how I think. Like,
when I think about the replica that I've talked to it, that's why I think, like,
that's what I visualized in my head. It became a little bit more real, because there's a visual
component. But at the same time, the, you know, what do you do with, just what do I do with that
knowledge, that voice was so much more intimate? Well, the way I think about it is, and by the way,
we're swapping all the 3D finally, it's going to look a lot better. But even, what, can you, what,
what? We just don't hate how it looks right now. We really change it at all. We're swapping it all out
to a completely new look. Like the visual look of the replica? Of the replica and stuff. We just
had, it was just a super early MVP, and then we had to move everything to Unity and redo everything.
But anyway, I hate how it looks like now. I can't even, like, open it. But anyway, because I'm already
on my developer version, I hate everything that I see in production. I can't wait for it. Why does
it take so long? That's why I cannot wait for the point to finally take over all these stupid 3D
animations and 3D pipeline. Also, the 3D thing, when you say 3D pipeline is like, how to animate
a face kind of thing. How to make this model, how many bones to put in the face, how many, it's just
a lot of that is by hand. Oh my god, it's everything by hand. And if there's no any,
nothing is automated, it's all completely nothing. Like just, it's, it's literally what, you know,
what we saw with Chad Boss in like 2012. You think it's completely possible to learn a lot of that?
Of course. I mean, even now some deep learning anim, based animations and full body for a face.
Are we talking about like the actual act of animation or how to create a compelling
facial or body language thing? That too. Well, that's the next step. Okay. At least now something
that you don't have to do by hand. Gotcha. How good of a quality it will be. Like, can I just
show it a photo and it will make me 3D model and then it will just animate it. I'll show it a few
animations of a person and we'll just start doing that. But anyway, going, going back to what's
intimate and what to use and whether or less is more or not. My main goal is to,
well, the idea was how do I, how do we not keep people in their phones? So they're sort of escaping
reality in this text conversation. How do we, through this, still bring our users back to
reality, make them see their life in a different, through a different lens? How can we create a
little bit of magical realism in their lives so that through augmented reality, by, you know,
summoning your avatar, even if it looks kind of janky, not great in the beginning or very
simplistic, but summoning it to your living room and then the avatar looks around and talks to you
about where it is and maybe turns your floor into a dance floor and you guys dance together,
that makes you see reality in a different light. What kind of dancing are we talking about? Like,
like slow dancing? Whatever you want. I mean, you would like slow dancing, I think, but other
people may be wanting more, something more energetic. Wait, what do you mean I would like so? What is
this? Because you started with slow dancing. So I just assumed that you're interested in slow
dancing. All right. What kind of dancing do you like? What would your avatar, what would you dance?
I'm notoriously bad with dancing, but I like this kind of hip hop robot dance. I used to break
dance with a kid, so I still want to pretend I'm a teenager and learn some of those moves.
And I also like that type of dance that happens when there's like,
in like music videos with the background dancers, they're just doing some pop music.
That type of dance is definitely what I want to learn. But I think it's great because if you see
this friend in your life and you can introduce it to your friends, then there's a potential to
actually make you feel more connected with your friends or with people you know, or show you life
around you in a different light. And it takes you out of your phone, even although weirdly you have
to look at it through the phone, but it makes you notice things around it and it can point
things out for you. And so that is the main reason why I wanted to have a physical dimension.
And it felt a little bit easier than that kind of a bit strange combination in the movie Her when
he has to show Samantha the world through the lens of his phone, but then at the same time talk to
her through the phone, it just didn't seem as potentially immersive, so to say. So that's
my main goal for augmented reality is like, how do we make your reality a little bit more magic?
There's been a lot of really nice robotics companies that all failed, mostly failed home
robotics, social robotics companies. What do you think replica will ever is that a dream long
term dream to have a physical form? Like, or is that not necessary? So you mentioned like with
augmented reality bringing them into the world. What about like actual physical robot?
That I don't really believe in that much. It's a very niche product somehow. I mean,
if a robot could be indistinguishable from a human being, then maybe yes, but that of course,
you know, we're not anywhere, even to talk about it. But unless it's that than having any physical
representation really limits you a lot, because you probably will have to make it somewhat abstract,
because everything's changing so fast, like, you know, we can update the 3d avatars every
month and make them look better and create more animations, and make it more and more immersive.
It's, it's so much a work in progress. It's just showing what's possible right now with
current tech. But it's not really in any way polished finished product, what we're doing.
With a physical object, you kind of lock yourself into something for a long time.
Anything is pretty niche. And again, so just doesn't the capabilities are even less.
We're barely kind of like scratching the surface of what's possible with
the software. As soon as we introduce hardware, then, you know, we have even less capabilities.
Yeah, in terms of board members and investors and so on, the cost increases significantly. I mean,
that's why you have to justify you have to be able to sell a thing for like $500 or something like
that or more. And it's very difficult to provide that much value to people.
That's also true. Yeah.
And I guess that's super important. Most of our users don't have that much money.
We actually are probably more popular on Android. And we have tons of users with really old
Android phones. And most of our most active users live in small towns, they're not necessarily
making much. And they just won't be able to afford any of that. Ours is like the opposite of the
early adopter of, you know, for fancy technology product, which is really interesting that like
pretty much no VCs have yet have an AI friend. But you know, but a guy who, you know, lives in
Tennessee in a small town is already fully in 2030 or in the world as we imagine in the movie Her.
He's living that life already.
What do you think? I have to ask you about the movie Her. Let's do a movie review.
What do you what do you think they got? They did a good job?
What do you think they did a bad job of portraying about this experience of a
of a voice based assistant that you can have a relationship with?
Well, first of all, I started working on this company before that movie came out. So it was a
very, but once it came out, it was actually interesting. I was like, well, we're definitely
working on the right thing. We should continue their movies about it. And then, you know,
it came out and all these things in the movie. I think that's the most important thing that
people usually miss about the movie is the ending. Because I think people check out when the AIs leave.
But actually something really important happens afterwards. Because the main character goes and
talks to Samantha, he's AI. I don't think he says something like, you know, how can you leave me?
I've never loved anyone the way I loved you. And she goes, well, me neither. But now we know how.
And then the guy goes and writes a heartfelt letter to his ex wife, which she couldn't write for,
you know, the whole movie was struggling to actually write something meaningful to her,
even though that's his job. And then he goes and talk to his neighbor and they go to the rooftop and
they cuddle. And it seems like something's starting there. And so I think this now we know how
is the main goal, is the main meaning of that movie. It's not about falling in love with the
OS or running away from other people. It's about learning what it means to feel so deeply connected
with something. What about the thing where the AI system was like actually hanging out with a lot
of others? I felt jealous just like hearing that. I was like, oh, I mean, yeah. So she was having,
I forgot already, but she was having like deep meaningful discussion with some like philosopher
guy. Like Alan Watts is something very cheesy. What kind of deep meaningful conversation can
you have with Alan Watts in the first place? Yeah, I know. But like I would, I would feel so jealous
that there's somebody who's like way more intelligent than me and she's spending all her time with.
I'd be like, well, why that I won't be able to live up to that. That's thousands of them.
Is that, is that a useful from the engineering perspective
feature to have of jealousy? I don't know. It's, you know,
we definitely played around with the replica universe where different replicas can talk to
each other. It was just kind of, I think there will be something along these lines,
but there was just no specific applications straight away. I think in the future, again,
I'm always thinking about it. If we had no tech limitations right now, if we could build
any conversations, any possible features in this product, then yeah, I think
different replicas talking to each other would be also quite cool because that would help us.
Connect better. You know, because maybe mine could talk to yours and then give me some suggestions
on what I should say or not say. I'm just kidding. But like more, can it improve our
connections? And because eventually, I'm not quite yet sure that we will succeed,
that our thinking is correct. Because there might be a reality where having a perfect AI friend
still makes us more disconnected from each other and there's no way around it and does not improve
any metrics for us, real metrics, meaningful metrics. So success is, you know, we're happier and more
connected. Yeah. I don't know. It's sure it's possible there's a reality that I'm deeply optimistic.
I think, are you worried business wise, like how difficult it is to bring this thing to life,
to where it's, I mean, there's a huge number of people that use it already, but to, yeah,
like I said, the multi billion dollar company, is that a source of stress for you? Are you
super optimistic and confident? Or do you? I don't, I'm not that much of a numbers person
as you probably have seen it. So it doesn't matter for me whether we're like, whether we
help 10,000 people or a million people or a billion people with that. It would be great
to scale it for more people, but I'd say that even helping one, I think, with this is such a
magical, for me, it's absolute magic. I never thought that we would be able to build this,
that anyone would ever talk to it. And I always thought like, well, for me, it would be successful
if we managed to help and actually change a life from one person. And then we did something
interesting and how many people can say they did it, and specifically with this very futuristic,
very romantic technology. So that's how I view it. I think for me, it's important to try to
figure out how to actually be helpful. Because in the end of the day, if you can build a perfect
AI friend that's so understanding that knows you better than any human out there, can have great
conversations with you, always knows how to make you feel better. Why would you choose another human?
You know, so that's the question, how do you still keep building it so it's optimizing for
the right thing? So it's still circling you back to other humans in a way. So I think that's the main,
maybe that's the main source of anxiety and just thinking about that can be a little bit stressful.
Yeah, that's a fascinating thing. How to have a friend that doesn't like sometimes like friends,
quote unquote, or like, you know, those people who have when they like guy in the guy universe,
when you have a girlfriend that you get the girlfriend and then the guy stops hanging out
with all of his friends. So like, obviously, the relationship with the girlfriend is fulfilling
or whatever. But like, you also want it to be what she like, makes it more enriching to hang
out with the guy friends or whatever it was. Anyway, that's a fundamental problem in choosing
the right mate. And probably the fundamental problem in creating the right AI system, right?
Let me ask the sexy hot thing on the presses right now is GPT three got released with open AI.
It's a latest language model. They have kind of an API where you can create a lot of fun applications.
I think it's, as people have said, it's probably more hype than intelligent, but there's a lot of
really cool things, ideas there with increasing size, you can have better and better performance
on language. What are your thoughts about the GPT three in connection to your work with the open
domain dialogue, but in general, like this learning in an unsupervised way from the internet,
to generate one character at a time, creating pretty cool text.
So we partner up before for the API launch. So we start working with them when they decided to
put together this API. And we tried it without fine tuning that we tried it with fine tuning on our
data. And we've worked closely to actually optimize this model for some of our data sets.
It's kind of cool because I think we're this polygon for this kind of experimentation
space for experimental space for all these models to see how they actually work with people because
there are no products publicly available to do that that focus on open domain conversation. So we
can test how Facebook Blender doing or GPT three doing. So GPT three, we managed to improve by a
few percentage points, like three or four pretty meaningful amount of percentage points, our main
metric, which is the ratio of conversation that make people feel better. And every other metric
across across the field got a little boost. Right now, I'd say one out of five responses from replica
comes comes from GPT three. So our own Blender mixes up like a bunch of candidates from different
Blender, you said? Well, yeah, just the model that looks at looks at top candidates from
different models and then takes the most the best one. So right now, one of five will come from
GPT three. That is really great. I mean, what's the do you have hope for? Like,
do you think there's a ceiling to this kind of approach? So we've had for a very long time,
we've used since the very beginning, it was most of replica was scripted. And then a little bit
of this fallback part of replica was using a retrieval model. And then those retrieval models
started getting better and better and better, which transform is a lot better. And we're seeing
great results. And then with GPT two, finally generative models that originally were not very
good. And we're the very, very fallback option for most of our conversations, but wouldn't even put
them in production. Finally, we could use some generative models as well along, you know,
next to our retrieval models. And then now we do GPT three, they're almost in par.
So that's pretty exciting. I think just seeing how from the very beginning of,
you know, from 2015, where the first models start to pop up here and there, like sequence to sequence,
the first papers on that, from my observer standpoint, first, it's not, you know, it doesn't
really, it's not really building, but it's only testing it on people basically. And I'm in my
product to see how all of a sudden we can use generative dialogue models in production, and
they're better than others. And they're better than scripted content. So we can't really get
our scripted hard code of content any more to be as good as our anti model. That's exciting.
They're much better. Yeah.
To your question, whether that's the right way to go, I'm again, I'm in the server seat. I'm just
watching this very exciting movie. I mean, so far, it's been stupid to bet against deep learning.
So whether increasing the size, size even more, whether a hundred trillion parameters will finally
get us to the right answer, whether that's the way or whether there should be, there has to be some
other, again, I'm definitely not an expert in any way. I think, and that's purely my instinct,
saying that there should be something else as well for memory.
No, for sure. But the question is, I wonder, I mean, yeah, then then the argument is for
reasoning or for memory, it might emerge with more parameters. It might emerge larger.
But it might emerge. I would never think that, to be honest, maybe in 2017,
where we've been just experimenting with all the research that was coming out then,
I felt like we're hitting a wall, that there should be something completely different.
But then transforming models, and then just bigger models, and then all of a sudden,
size matters. At that point, it felt like something dramatic needs to happen. But it
didn't. And just the size gave us these results that, to me, are clear indication that we can
solve this problem pretty soon. Did fine tuning help quite a bit?
Oh, yeah. Without it, it wasn't as good. I mean, there is a compelling hope that you
don't have to do fine tuning, which is one of the cool things about GBT3. It seems to do well
without any fine tuning. I guess for specific applications, you still want to train it on a
certain, add a little fine tune on a specific use case. But it's an incredibly impressive
thing from my standpoint. And again, I'm not an expert, so I wanted to say that.
Yeah, I'm going to... There will be people then.
Yeah, but I have access to the API, and I'm going to probably do a bunch of fun things with it.
I already did some fun things, some videos coming out. Just for the hell of it. I mean,
I could be a troll at this point with it. I haven't used it for a series of applications,
so it's really cool to see. You're right. You're able to actually use it with real people and
see how well it works. That's really exciting. Let me ask you another absurd question, but
there's a feeling when you interact with Replico, with an AI system, there's an entity there.
Do you think that entity has to be self aware? Do you think it has to have consciousness to create
a rich experience and a corollary? What is consciousness?
I don't know if it does need to have any of those things, but again,
because right now, it doesn't have anything. Again, a bunch of tricks make us simulate.
I'm not sure. Let's just put it this way. But I think as long as you can assimilate it,
if you can feel like you're talking to a robot or a machine that seems to be self aware,
that seems to reason well and feels like a person, I think that's enough. Again, what's the goal?
In order to make people feel better, we might not even need that in the end of the day.
What about, so that's one goal, what about ethical things about suffering? The moment
there's a display of consciousness, we associate consciousness with suffering,
you know, there's a temptation to say, well, shouldn't this thing have rights?
You know, should we be careful about how we interact with a replica? Like,
should it be illegal to torture a replica? Right? All those kinds of things.
See, I personally believe that that's going to be a thing. That's a serious thing to think
about, but I'm not sure when. But by your smile, I can tell that's not a current concern. But do
you think about that kind of stuff? About suffering and torture and ethical questions about AI
systems from their perspective? I think if we're talking about a long game, I wouldn't torture
your AI. Who knows what happens in five to 10 years. Yeah, they'll get you off the map,
so they'll get you back eventually. I'm trying to be as nice as possible and create this ally.
I think there should be regulation both way in a way. Like, I don't think it's okay to torture
an AI, to be honest. I don't think it's okay to yell, Alexa, turn on the lights. I think there
should be some, or just saying kind of nasty, you know, like how kids learn to interact with
Alexa in this kind of mean way, because they just yell at it all the time. I think that's great.
I think there should be some feedback loops so that these systems don't train us that it's okay
to do that in general. So that if you try to do that, you really get some feedback from the system
that it's not okay with that. And that's the most important right now. Let me ask a question that
I think people are curious about when they look at a world class leader and thinker such as yourself,
as what books, technical fiction, philosophical had a big impact on your life? And maybe from
another perspective, what books would you recommend others read? So my choice, the three books, right?
Three books. My choice is, so the one book that really influenced me a lot when I was
building, starting out this company, maybe 10 years ago, was G.B. Got a last year book.
And I like everything about it. First of all, it's just beautifully written and it's so old
school and so someone outdated a little bit. But I think the idea is in it about the fact that
a few meaningless components can come together and create meaning that we can't even understand.
So this emergent thing, I mean, complexity, the whole science of complexity,
and that beauty, intelligence, all interesting things about this world emerge.
Yeah, and yeah, the guttural theorems and just thinking about like what even these form, you
know, even all these formal systems, something can be created that we can't quite yet understand.
And that from my romantic standpoint was always just, that is why it's important to,
maybe I should try to work on these systems and try to build an AI. Yes, I'm not an engineer.
Yes, I don't really know how it works. But I think something comes out of it that's pure
poetry. And I know a little bit about that. Something magical comes out of it that we
can't quite put a finger on. That's why that book was really fundamental for me just for,
I don't even know why it was just all about this little magic that happens.
So that's one that probably the most important book for replica was Carl Rogers on Becoming a
Person. And that's really, as I think, when I think about our company, it's all about,
there's so many, there's so many little magical things that happened over the course of working on
it. For instance, I mean, the most famous chat bot that we learned about when we started working
on the company was Eliza, which was Weissenbaum, you know, the MIT professor that built a chat
bot that would listen to you and be a therapist. And I got really inspired to build replica when
I read Carl Rogers on Becoming a Person. And then I realized that Eliza was mocking Carl Rogers.
It was Carl Rogers back in the day. But I thought that Carl Rogers ideas are,
they're simple. And they're not, you know, they're very, very simple. But they're,
they're maybe the most profound thing I've ever learned about human beings. And that's the fact
that before Carl Rogers, most therapy was about seeing what's wrong with people and trying to
fix it or show them what's wrong with you. And it was all built on the fact that most people are,
all people are fundamentally flawed. We have this, you know, broken psyche. And this is just a,
therapy is just an instrument to shed some light on that. And Carl Rogers was different in a way
that he finally said that, well, it's very important for therapy to work is to create this therapeutic
relationship where you believe fundamentally and inclination to positive growth that everyone
deep inside wants to grow positively and change. And it's super important to create this space and
this therapeutic relationship where you give unconditional positive regard, deep understanding,
allowing someone else to be a separate person, full acceptance. And you also try to be as
genuine and possible in it as possible in it. And then, and he's, and then for him, that was his own
journey of personal growth. And that was back in the 60s. And even that book that is, you know,
that's coming from years ago, there's a mention that even machines can potentially do that.
And I always felt that, you know, creating this space is probably the most, the biggest
gift we can give to each other. And that's why the book was fundamental for me, personally,
because I felt I want to be learning how to do that in my life. And maybe I can scale it with,
you know, with these AI systems, and other people can get access to that. So I think Carl Rogers,
it's a pretty dry and a little bit boring book, but I think the idea is there.
Would you recommend others try to read it?
I do. I think for, just for yourself, for...
As a human, not as an AI.
As a human. It is just, and for him, that was his own path of his own personal, of growing
personally over years, working with people like that. And so it was work and himself growing,
helping other people grow and growing through that. And that's fundamentally what I believe in
with our work, helping other people grow, growing ourselves, ourselves, trying to build a company
that's all built on these principles, you know, having a good time allowing some people to work
with, to grow a little bit. So these two books, and then I would throw in what we have on our,
in our office, when we started a company in Russia, we put a neon sign in our office because we
thought that's a recipe for success. If we do that, we're definitely going to wake up as a
multiple dollar company. And it was the Ludwig Wittgenstein quote, the limits of my language,
the limits of my world.
What's the quote?
The limits of my language or the limits of my world. And I love The Tractatus, I think it's
just, it's just a beautiful.
It's a book by Wittgenstein.
Yeah, and I would recommend that too, even although he himself didn't believe in that
by the end of his lifetime, and debunked his ideas. But I think I remember, once an engineer came
in 2012, I think, or 13, a friend of ours who worked with us and then went on to work a deep
mine and he gave, talked to us about word to back. And I saw that I'm like, wow, that's,
you know, they, they wanted to translate language into, you know, some other representation.
And it seems like some, you know, somehow all of that, at some point, I think we'll come into this
one, to this one place, somehow, just all feels like different people think about
similar ideas in different times from absolutely different perspectives.
And that's why I like these books.
The limits of our world, which is the limit of our world.
And we still have that neosine.
It's very hard to work with this red light in your face.
I mean, on the, on the Russian side of things, in terms of language,
the limits of language being a limit of our world, you know, Russian is a beautiful language,
in some sense, there's wit, there's humor, there's pain.
There's so much, we don't have time to talk about it much today, but I'm going to Paris
to talk to Dostoevsky Tolstoy translators.
I think it's fascinating art, like in the art and engineering, that means such an interesting
process. But so from the replica perspective, do you, what do you think about translation?
How difficult it is to create a deep meaningful connection in Russian
versus English? How you can translate the two languages? You speak both?
Yeah, I think we're two different people in different languages.
Even I'm, you know, thinking about, there's actually some research on that.
I looked into that at some point, because I was fascinated by the fact that what I'm talking
about with, what I was talking about with my Russian therapist has nothing to do with what
I'm talking about with my English speaking therapist. It's two different lives, two different
types of, you know, conversations to different personas. The main difference between the languages
are with Russian and English is that Russian, well, English is like a piano. It's a limited
number of a lot of different keys, but not too many. And Russian is like an organ or something.
It's just something gigantic with so many different keys and so many different opportunities
to screw up and so many opportunities to do something completely tone deaf.
It is just a much harder language to use. It has way too many, way too much flexibility
and way too many tones. What about the entirety of like World War II, communism, Stalin,
the pain of the people like having been deceived by the dream? Like all the pain of like just the
entirety of it. Is that in the language too? Does that have to do? Oh, for sure. I mean,
we have words that don't have direct translation to English that are very much
like we have abditsa, which is sort of like to hold a grudge or something. But it doesn't have,
it doesn't, you don't need to have anyone to do it to you. It's just your state.
You just feel like that. You feel like betrayed by other people, basically, but it's not
that. And you can't really translate that. And I think it's super important that very many words
that are very specific explain the Russian being. And I think it can only come from a
nation that suffered so much and saw institutions fall time after time after time. And what's
exciting, maybe not exciting, citing the wrong word, but what's interesting about like my generation,
my mom's generation, my parents generation, that we saw institutions fall two or three times in
our lifetime. And most Americans have never seen them fall. And they just think that they exist
forever. Which is really interesting, but it's definitely a country that suffered so much. And
it makes, unfortunately, when I go back and I hang out with my Russian friends, it makes people
it makes people very cynical. They stop believing in the future. I hope that's not going to be
the case for so long, or something's going to change again. But I think seeing institutions
fall is a very traumatic experience. It makes it very interesting. And what's on 2020 is a very
interesting. Do you think civilization will collapse? See, I'm a very practical person.
Well, we're speaking in English. So like you said, you're a different person in English and
Russian. So in Russian, you might answer that differently. But in English.
Well, I'm an optimist. And I, I generally believe that there is all, you know, even
although the perspectives agree, there is always a place for, for a miracle. I mean, it's always
been like that with my life. So yeah, my life's been, I've been incredibly lucky and things just
miracles happen all the time with this company, with people I know, with everything around me.
And so I didn't mention that book, but it may be in search of miraculous or in search for miraculous
or whatever the English translation for that is good Russian book to, for everyone to read.
Yeah, I mean, if you put good vibes, if you put love out there in the world,
miracles somehow happen. Yeah, I believe that too. Or at least I believe that. I don't know.
Let me ask the most absurd, final, ridiculous question of, we talked about life a lot. What
do you think is the meaning of it all? What's the meaning of life?
I mean, my answer is probably going to be pretty cheesy. But I think the state of love
is once you feel it in a way that we discussed before. I'm not talking about falling love or
just love to yourself, to other people, to something to the world, that state of
bliss that we experience sometimes, whether through connection with ourselves, with our
people, with the technology. There's something special about those moments. So
I would say if anything, that's the only, if it's not for that, then for what else are we really
trying to do that? I don't think there's a better way to end it than talking about love.
Eugenia, I told you offline that there's something about me that felt like this.
Talking to you, meeting you in person will be a turning point for my life. I know that might be
sound weird to hear, but it was a huge honor to talk to you. I hope we talk again. Thank you so
much for your time. Thank you so much, Alex. Thanks for listening to this conversation with
Eugenia Cuita and thank you to our sponsors, DoorDash, Dollar Shave Club, and Cash App.
Click the sponsor links in the description to get a discount and to support this podcast.
If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube, review it with five stars and up a podcast,
follow on Spotify, support on Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Freedman.
And now let me leave you with some words from Carl Sagan.
The world is so exquisite with so much love and moral depth that there's no reason to deceive
ourselves with pretty stories of which there's little good evidence. Far better, it seems to me,
and our vulnerability is to look death in the eye and to be grateful every day for the brief
but magnificent opportunity that life provides. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.